It was among these that Hinkle identified a photograph of Barco!!

For it seems that Barco, fancying himself a ladies' man( and why not, after seven marriages??

), had listed himself for Mormon Beard roles at the instigation of his fourth murder victim who had said: `` With your beard, dear, you ought to be in movies ''!!

Mills secured Barco's photograph from the gentleman in charge, rushed to the Hollywood police station to report the theft, and less than five minutes later, detectives with his picture in hand were on the trail of Cal Barco.

On their way, they stopped at every gas station along the main boulevards to question the attendants.

Finally, at Ye Olde Gasse Filling Station on Avocado Avenue, they learned that their man, having paused to get oil for his car, had asked about the route to San Diego.

They headed in that direction and, at San Juan Capistrano By-the-Sea came upon Barco sitting in the quaint old Spanish Mission Drive-in, eating a hot tamale.

At the moment, Barco's back was to the road so he didn't see the detectives close in on his convertible which, in their quest for the stolen lap rug, they proceeded to search.

The robe, however, was missing, for by that time Barco had disposed of it at a pawnshop in Glendale.

The detectives placed Barco under arrest and, without informing him of the nature of the charge, took him back to Hollywood for questioning.

Thus it was that Barco, apprehended for mere larceny, now began to suspect that one or another of his murders had been uncovered.

During the return trip, Barco kept muttering to himself in meaningless phrases, such as: `` They're under sand dunes They're better off, I tell you I saved their souls ''.

The detective, commenting on Barco's behavior, felt that he merely belonged among the myriad citizens of our community who are mentally unhinged -- that he was a more or less harmless `` nut ''!!

However while in his cell awaiting trial for theft, Barco, in a fit of apprehension, made an attempt to take his own life.

The attempt had failed because, when endeavoring to cut his wrists, this murderer of seven women had fainted at the sight of blood.

The jail authorities -- attaching no particular significance to the episode -- offered Barco whisky to revive him;;

but the old fellow, a lifelong teetotaler, refused it, and no more was thought of the matter.

Then it was that District Attorney Welch entered the case.

A man of vaulting ambition, with one eye on the mayorship of Los Angeles, nothing ever escaped him which might possibly lead to personal publicity.

It was reported to Welch's office that a thief in the city jail had attempted suicide.

Welch wanted to know why.

No one knew.

Now Welch had a pet theory that everyone is guilty of breaking more laws than he ever gets caught at.

The suicide attempt looked to him like an opportunity to put his theory to the test.

So he paid a call on Barco in his cell and began their chat by stating bluntly:

`` Barco, we've got the goods on you!!

It'll be a lot better if you come clean ''.

At first Barco was evasive and shifty.

But with Welch's relentless pursuit of the subject, Barco finally `` broke '' and started confessing to one murder after another.

By the time Barco reached the count of three, the situation seemed to Welch almost too good to be true.

But if true, it was the case of which he had dreamed, the case which would throw him into headlines all over America as the hero of a great murder trial.

Welch summoned jail officials to Barco's cell.

But to Welch's chagrin, the police captain pooh-poohed Welch's credulity in Barco's confession.

Barco was clearly a `` nut ''.

It required strength, bravado, daring to commit murder.

`` That worm a murderer??

Ridiculous ''!!

Then, for the first time since his arrest, a glint of spirit lit Barco's eyes.

His manhood had been attacked.

He stiffened and rose to his feet.

He'd show them!!

`` Is that so ''??

He queried.

`` Well, for ten years I've been murdering women.

I can lead you to every one of the bodies, and there ain't four, nor five, nor six of 'em -- there's seven!!

''

The next day the police captain, in derision, organized what he termed `` Welch's Wild Goose Chase ''.

For indeed it seemed incredible that anyone could go on committing murder for ten years and not get caught at it, even in Hollywood.

The searching party consisted of the police captain, Welch, Barco, policemen with shovels, newspaper reporters, and cameramen.

Barco, his state of apprehension gone, never to return, had assumed a matter-of-factness which remained his principal attitude from that time on.

He directed the cortege of autos to the sand dunes near Santa Monica.

Stopping the cars at a fork in the road, he got out, paced off a certain distance to a spot between two shrub-covered sand hills, and indicated a location.

Orders were given to dig.

Nothing was found.

Welch was worried.

The police captain chortled.

The newspaper boys cracked jokes and again Barco's pride was aroused.

With greater precision he again paced off a location, this time a little more to the left.

With quibs and gibes, the policemen again started digging.

Welch was on edge.

The captain was remarking that it was a nice day for a picnic when finally one of the shovels struck an object.

`` There's something here ''!!

Said the digger.

Joking stopped and everyone gathered around.

The digger, thrusting about with his shovel, now raised into view a package crudely wrapped in one of the murderer's Hollywood sport shirts.

Although it was a mere fragment of the victim's remains, it was enough.

Welch was wild with delight.

His elation grew as Barco's seven disclosures brought to light one reward after another.

Now did Welch truly become the man of the hour, and everything that followed in the procedure of Justice was a new triumph for him.

It went to his head, and his ambition increased.

It was apparent that Welch was in cahoots with Marshall and would use his power as D.A. to drag every possible sensation into the case.

Every new scandal which would provide more `` copy '' for Marshall's pen would thus mean more publicity for Welch.

I knew that both these cynics were waiting with impatience for the dramatic moment when Viola was called to the stand.

Once there, the D.A. with devilish cleverness would provide Marshall with headlines: `` Viola's Multiple Romances '' `` Viola Lake an Addict '' `` Downfall of Another Film Idol ''!!

It would be fine publicity for the man who was willing to walk to the mayor's throne over the broken reputation of a helpless girl!!

I studied Welch closely as the trial progressed for any hint which might give me a lead as to how he might be thwarted.

It wasn't long before I sensed that there was something deeper than overvaulting ambition back of his desire for Viola's destruction.

He was bitter and resentful toward her, personally resentful.

A dreadful fear entered my consciousness that perhaps he had entertained aspirations toward Viola's favors -- or, even more serious perhaps, that he had attained a share of them and had then been superseded by some luckier chap.

I did not rest until I had tracked the mystery down.

Well, here it is.

One day over a year before, there had been a cocktail party in an apartment of a downtown hotel.

Viola had been urged to attend, by telephone, and not knowing the host or the character of the party, she had gone.

She arrived late and as she entered the party, noted that gentlemen seemed to be in the majority;;

the air was thick with smoke, empty bottles were in evidence, and several of the guests were somewhat the worse for liquor.

Naturally, Viola had no wish to remain, but she felt she couldn't leave so soon after her arrival, in all politeness to her host.

And it so happened that adjacent to a couch on which she had taken refuge was a small table on which she noted a vase of red rosebuds;;

while projecting from beneath the couch were a pair of feet which, as Fate would have it, belonged to District Attorney Welch.

As Viola sat there, a playful impulse overcame her to remove the shoes and socks from the unidentified feet and, as a prank, insert rosebuds between the toes.

A little later the district attorney woke up, emerged from under the couch, looked at his watch, and realized he had an engagement that very hour to address a meeting of the Culture Forum on `` The Civic Spirit of the Southland '', in the Byzantine room of the hotel where his wife, as president of the forum, was to preside.

He made his way to his host's bedroom where he carefully brushed himself off, neatly arranged his hair, and painstakingly selected his hat from the many on the bed.

Then, noting neither the absence of his footwear nor the presence of the rosebuds, he made his way to the Byzantine room and, with his usual dignity, mounted the rostrum.

The effect on the intellectuals among his audience may well be imagined.

The incident, aside from reflecting on Welch's political career, had all but wrecked his home life.

He never rested until he discovered who the culprit was, and when he did, he vowed vengeance on Viola Lake if ever the chance came his way.

And here it was!!

By such innocent actions are human tragedies sometimes set in motion.

During these first days of the trial I didn't have as much time to commiserate with Viola as I should have liked.

In the first place, it was difficult for us to meet.

We couldn't be seen together, for the tongue of Scandal was ever ready to link our names, and the tongue of Scandal finds but one thing to say of the association of a man with a girl, no matter how innocent.

I couldn't invite Viola to our house, for Mother snobbishly refused to receive her.

Now the Czarship had not affected my own sense of social values, but Mother had attained a reflected glory through it, which had opened the doors of Los Angeles-Pasadena Society to her.

There, Mother was received by the scions of aristocratic lines which are dominated by the Budweisers( of beer derivation), the Chalmers( of underwear origin), and the Heinzes( whose forbears founded a nationally famous trade in pickles).

I hated being dragged into the salons of these aristocrats.

But Mother insisted, for it is seldom indeed that anyone remotely connected with the cinema is ever received in their exclusive midsts.

In fact, it was not until the King of Spain had visited at Pickfair that Mary and Doug were beckoned to cross the sacred barriers which separate Los Angeles and Pasadena from the hoi-polloi.

Mother even went so far as to trump up for me matrimonial opportunities with Pasadena debs who had been educated abroad, and with those of the more lenient Los Angeles area where a debutante was a girl who had been to high school.

But at long last came a time when I broke away from Mother and her society `` chi-chi '' in order to spend a cosy evening with Viola and her chaperon at her home.

However, such a hotbed of gossip had grown up during the trial, that every precaution had to be taken to keep my visit from being whispered to the world, Society, and even, alas, to my own mother.

When I arrived at Viola's I was shown, to my surprise, into the kitchen.

Viola greeted me, in checked apron, ladle in hand, and explained it was the cook's night out and that she herself was preparing dinner.

I sat and watched proceedings.

There was to be roast chicken with dressing, giblet gravy, asparagus, new peas with a sprig of mint, creamed onions, and mashed potatoes -- all chosen, prepared, and cooked by Viola herself.

I realized that Hamlet was faced with an entirely different problem, but his agony could have been no greater.

The most that was accomplished was adding Mrs. Beige's tray to the dish pile, and by means of repeated threats, on an ascending scale, seeing that the girls dressed themselves, after a fashion.

I was saved from making the decision as the phone rang, and the girls were upon me instantly.

Here's a household hint: if you can't find your children, and get tired of calling them, pick up the phone.

No matter if your children are at the movies, in school, visiting their grandmother, or on a field trip in some distant city, they will be upon you magically within seconds after you pick up the phone.

Jennie and Miranda twined themselves around me, murmuring endearments.

Louise climbed onto a stool and clutched the hand with which I was trying to hold the phone, claiming my immediate attention on grounds of extreme emergency.

Somehow managing to get out a cool, poised, `` Won't you hold on a second, please '', I covered up the mouthpiece, and with more warmth and less poise, gave a quick lecture on crime and punishment, mostly the latter, including Devil's Island and the remoter reaches of Siberia.

I promised to illustrate the lecture, if they so much as breathed till after the call was completed.

Speaking into the phone again and recognizing the caller, I resumed my everyday voice.

Soon we were deep in a conversation that was interrupted many times by little things like Jennie's holding her breath and pretending to black out, Miranda's dumping the contents of the sugar bowl on the table, and various screeches, thuds, and giggles.

Under the circumstances, I had difficulty keeping up with the conversation on the phone, but when I hung up I was reasonably certain that Francesca had wanted to remind me of our town meeting the next evening, and how important it was that Hank and I be there.

I discovered that the girls had shrewdly vacated the kitchen, and were playing quietly in the living room.

It seemed that I would be the gainer if I accepted the peace and quiet, instead of carrying out my threats.

Resolving to get something done, I started in on the dishes.

No.

I'm not saying it right.

What I meant to say was that I started to start in on the dishes by gathering them all together in the kitchen sink.

They looked so formidable, however, so demanding, that I found myself staring at them in dismay and starting to woolgather again, this time about Francesca and her husband.

How about them, I thought.

Francesca and Herbert were among the few people we knew in Catatonia.

We didn't even know them till about a month after we moved -- at that time, they had called on us, after I met Fran at a PTA meeting, and had taken us in hand socially.

They had been kind to us and we were indebted to them for one or two pleasant dinners, and for information as to where to shop, which dentist, doctor, plumber, and sitter to call( not that there was much of a choice, since Catatonia was just a village;;

the yellow pages of the telephone book were amazingly thin).

They were `` personalities ''.

Herb, an expert on narrow ties, thin lapels, and swatches, was men's fashion editor of Parvenu, the weekly magazine with the tremendous circulation.

Fran and he had met about two years after she had arrived in Manhattan from Nebraska, or was it Wyoming??

She was the daughter and sole heiress of either a cattle baron or an oil millionaire and, having arrived in New York with a big bank roll, became a dabbler in various fields.

She patronized Greenwich Village artists for awhile, then put some money into a Broadway show which was successful( terrible, but successful).

It was during her `` writing '' period that she and Herb met and decided that they were in love.

They were married at a lavish ceremony which was duly recorded in Parvenu and all other magazines and newspapers, and then they honeymooned in Bermuda.

No, not Bermuda.

Bermuda was not in style that year.

They had honeymooned in Rome;;

everyone was very high on Rome that year.

They had bought their house in Catatonia after investigating all the regions of suburbia surrounding New York;;

they had chosen Catatonia because of its reputation for excellent schools, beaches, and abundance of names.

`` You are bound to get involved with people when you have children '', Fran had told me at our first meeting, `` so it is good to know that those with whom you get involved are not just dreary little housewives and dull husbands, but People Who Do Things ''.

I admired their easy way of doing things but I couldn't escape an uneasiness at their way of always doing the right things.

Their house was a centuries-old Colonial which they had had restored( guided by an eminent architect) and updated, and added on to.

It had a gourmet's corner( instead of a kitchen), a breakfast room, a luncheon room, a dining room, a sitting room, a room for standing up, a party room, dressing rooms for everybody, even a room for mud.

It was all set up so there would be no dust anywhere and so that their children would color in the coloring room, paint in the painting room, play with blocks in the block house, and do all the other things in the proper rooms at exactly the right time.

Their two boys were `` well adjusted '' and, like their parents, always did the right thing at the right time and damn the consequences.

Francesca and Herbert considered themselves violently nonconformist and showed the world they were by filling their Colonial house with contemporary furniture and paintings and other art objects( expensive, but not necessarily valuable, contemporary things).

Fran flaunted her independence by rebelling against the Catatonia uniform of Bermuda shorts and knee-length socks by wearing Bermuda shorts and knee-length socks in colors;;

bright pinks and plaids and vivid stripes.

Sometimes she even wore the uniform in solid, unrelieved black, and with her blonde hair cut so closely, wearing this uniform, she strongly resembled a member of the SS..

No one could dislike them, I thought.

Sometimes, though, they did not seem quite human.

It seemed, indeed, that their house was not so much a home, but rather a perfect stage set, and that they were actors who had been handed fat roles in a successful play, and had talent enough to fill the roles competently, with nice understatement.

Practically the only enthusiasm they showed was when they were discussing `` names '';;

even brand names.

You should hear the reverence in Fran's voice when she said `` Baccarat '' or `` Steuben '' or `` Madame Alexander ''.

She always let it be known that there was wine in the pot roast or that the chicken had been marinated in brandy, and that Koussevitzky's second cousin was an intimate of theirs.

I wouldn't have wasted time puzzling over this couple were it not for my fear that all the other inhabitants of Catatonia were equally unreal.

I couldn't feel at home among them.

Besides Francesca, there was Blanche.

Francesca was pleasant and charming, but Blanche was sweet.

Yes, Blanche was very, very sweet -- being in her company was like being drowned in warm, melted marshmallows.

I had once been a witness when Blanche had smiled and said with only minimum ruefulness, `` Oh, my souffle has collapsed ''.

Anyone knows how a real, red-blooded woman would react to such a catastrophe!!

If Blanche had been honest, she would have yelled, slammed at least a couple of doors, and thrown a few little, valueless things.

But dear me, no;;

not Blanche.

After five minutes with Blanche, one might welcome the astringency of Grazie, who was a sort of Gwen Cafritz to Francesca's Perle Mesta.

Francesca and Grazie were habitual committee chairmen and they usually managed to be elected co-chairmen, equal bosses, of whatever PTA or civic project was being launched.

They were inseparable, not because they were fond of each other, but because they wanted to keep an eye on each other, as they were keen rivals for social leadership.

Grazie was mean: quietly mean, and bitterly, unfunnily sarcastic.

She it was who had looked to see if I was wearing shoes upon learning that I couldn't drive.

Grazie had a small, slick head and her hair and skin were the color of golden toast.

She lived in an ultra-modern house whose decoration, appointments, paint, and even pets were chosen to complement her coloring;;

the pets were a couple of Siamese cats.

Her uniform was of rich, raw silk, in a shade which matched her hair, skin, housepaint, and cats, and since she was so thin as to be almost shapeless, she rather resembled a frozen fish stick.

The husbands of these women and others I had met in Catatonia were distinguished only in that they were, to me at least, indistinguishable.

I couldn't tell one from the other.

Like Herbert, they were all in communications: radio, television, magazines, and advertising.

One or two were writers of books;;

all were fellows of finite charm.

Each had developed a hair-trigger chuckle and the habit of saying `` zounds ''!!

In deference to country-squirehood.

I never thought I'd live to hear people chuckle and say `` zounds ''!!

In real life.

I wouldn't have missed it for anything.

They were `` sincere '' -- men of the too-hearty handclasp and the urgent smile.

These boys acknowledged an introduction to anybody by gently pressing one of his hands in both of theirs, while they gazed, misty-eyed with care, into the eyes of the person they were meeting.

Could such unadulterated love, for a total stranger, be credited??

They were always leaping to light cigarettes, open car doors, fill plates or glasses, and I mistrusted the whole lot of them to the same degree that I mistrusted bake shops that called themselves `` Sanitary Bake Shops ''.

`` O!!

Pioneers!!

'' I thought, and wondered what kind of homesteads such odd pioneers would establish in this suburban frontier;;

pioneers who looked like off-duty gardeners even at parent-teacher conferences and who never called the school principal `` Mister ''.

I sighed, thinking that among other things, people here seemed to be those who would have to cut down if they earned less than $85,000 yearly;;

people who would give their teeth for a chance to get on `` Person to Person '';;

people who thought it was nice to be important, but not important to be nice;;

who were more ingratiating than gracious, more personalities than persons.

In my estimation, they were people who read Daphne du Maurier, and discussed Kafka;;

well, not discussed him exactly, but said, `` Kafka ''!!

Reverently and raised their eyes, as if they were at a loss to describe how they felt about Kafka, which they were, because they had no opinions about Kafka, not having read Kafka.

They were, I felt, people invariably trying to prove not who, but what they were, and trying to determine what, not who, others were.

Becoming aware that it was nearly lunchtime, I brought myself back to the tasks at hand.

I made plans for the afternoon -- doing the breakfast and luncheon dishes all at once, making the beds, and then maybe painting the kitchen.

Then, I remembered that the girls had had a banana for dessert every day for the last week.

`` Bananas ''!!

Jennie had shouted each time.

`` They're not dessert!!

They're not even food.

They're just something you're supposed to put on cereal for breakfast ''.

I dug around and found a mix, and was able to surprise them with a devil's-food cake with chocolate icing.

( Sometimes I think you need only one rule for cooking: if you can't put garlic in it, put chocolate in it.

)

The cake was received in a stunned silence that was evidence in itself of the dearth of taste thrills Mama had been providing.

Then Jennie closed her eyes, stretched forth her arms, and said: `` Take my hand, Louise;;

I'm a stranger in paradise ''.

Needless to say, I was furious at this unparalleled intrusion upon free enterprise.

How dared they demand to `` snoop '' in private financial records, disbursements, confidential contracts and agreements??

`` It is as though '', I said on the historic three-hour, coast-to-coast radio broadcast which I bought( following Father Coughlin and pre-empting the Eddie Cantor, Manhattan Merry-go-round and Major Bowes shows) `` That Man in the White House, like some despot of yore, insisted on reading my diary, raiding my larder and ransacking my lingerie!!

'' My impassioned plea for civil rights created a landslide of correspondence and one sponsor even asked me to consider replacing the Eddie Cantor comedy hour on a permanent basis.

But what quarter could a poor defenseless woman expect from a dictator who would even make so bold as to close all of the banks in our great nation??

The savage barbarian hordes of red Russian Communism descended on the Athens that was mighty Metronome, sacking and despoiling with their Bolshevistic battle cry of `` Soak the rich'!!

After an unspeakable siege, lasting the better part of two months, it was announced that the studio `` owed '' the government a tax debt in excess of eight million dollars while I, who had always remained aloof from such iniquitous practices as paying taxes on the salary I had earned and the little I legally inherited as Morris' helpless relict, was `` stung '' with a personal bill of such astronomical proportions as to `` wipe out '' all but a fraction of my poor, hard-come-by savings.

I was also publicly reprimanded, dragged through the mud by the radical press and made a figure of fun by such leftist publications as The New Republic, The New Yorker, Time and The Christian Science Monitor.

It was then that I availed myself of the rights of a citizen and declared the income tax unconstitutional.

The litigation was costly and seemingly endless.

I fought like a tigress but by the time I appealed my case to the Supreme Court( 1937), Mr. Roosevelt and his `` henchmen '' had done their `` dirty work '' all too well, even going so far as to attempt to `` pack '' the highest tribunal in the land in order to defeat little me.

Presidential coercion had succeeded not only in poisoning the courtiers, `` toadies '' and sycophants of the `` bench '' against me, but it had been so far-reaching as to discourage any lawyer in the nation from representing me!!

I was ready, like Portia, to present my own brief.

But the Supreme Court wouldn't even hear my case!!

My plea was unanimously voted down and `` thrown out ''.

Again, my name was on all the front pages.

I was, it seemed, persona non grata in every quarter, but not entirely without a staunch following of noted political thinkers and students of jurisprudence.

As Charles Evans Hughes said, `` Miss Poitrine's limitations as an actress are exceeded only by her logic as a litigant ''.

Albert Einstein was quoted as saying: `` The workings of the woman's mind amaze me ''.

Henry Ford spoke of me as `` utterly astounding ''.

Heywood Broun wrote: `` Belle Poitrine is the most original thinker since Caligula '', and even F.D.R. had to concede that `` if the rest of this nation showed the foresight and patriotism of Miss Poitrine, America would rapidly resemble ancient Babylon and Nineveh ''.

Not only were the court costs prohibitive, but I was subjected to crippling fines, in addition to usurious interest on the unpaid `` debts '' which the government claimed that Metronome and I owed -- a severe financial blow.

Nor, as Manny said, had the notoriety done my career `` any good ''.

My enemies were only too anxious to level against me such charges as `` reactionary '', `` robber baroness '', and even `` traitor ''!!

Traitor indeed!!

I point now with pride to the fact that, long ere the Committee on Un-American Activities, the Minute Women, the Economic Council and other such notable `` watchdog '' organizations were so much as heard of, I was Hollywood's leading bulwark against communism, fighting single-handedly `` creeping socialism '' against such insuperable odds as the Fascio-Communist troops of the NRA, PWA, WPA, CCC and an army of more than twenty-two million mercenaries whom F.D.R. employed secretly, through the transparent ruse of regular `` relief '' checks.

Needless to say, my art suffered drastically during this turbulent period.

Could it do otherwise??

Even though I have always had a genius for `` throwing myself '' into every role and `` playing it for all it's worth '', no actress can be expected to do her best work when her fortune, her reputation, her livelihood, her home and her nation itself are all imperilled.

Such sweeping distractions are hardly conducive to `` Oscar '' winning performances.

I tried my hardest, with little help, may I say, from my husband and leading man, but somehow the outside pressures were too severe.

Having( through my unflagging effort and devotion) achieved stardom, a fortune and a world-renowned wife at an age when most young men are casting their first vote, Letch proceeded to neglect them all.

Never a `` quick study '', he now made no attempt to learn his `` lines '' and many a mile of film was wasted, many a scene -- sometimes involving as many as a thousand fellow thespians -- was taken thirty, forty, fifty times because Miss Poitrine's co-star and `` helpmate '' had never learned his part.

Each time Letch `` went up '' in his `` lines '', I was the one to be patient, helpful and apologetic while he indulged in outbursts of temperament, profanity and abuse, blaming others, going into `` sulks '' and, on more occasions than I care to count, storming off the `` set '' for the rest of the day.

As for his finances, I was never privileged to know exactly how much money Letch had `` salted away ''.

It was I who paid for our little home, the food, the liquor, the servants -- even Letch's bills at his tailor and the Los Angeles Athletic Club.

Never once did he buy me a single gift and for our third anniversary he gave me a dislocated jaw.

( But that is another story.

) As for his private monies, they were rapidly dissipated in drinking, gaming and carousing.

More than once I was confronted by professional gamblers, `` bookies '', loan `` sharks '', gangsters, `` thugs '' and `` finger men '' -- people of a class I did not even know existed -- to repay my husband's staggering losses, `` or else '' I shuddered to think that someone so dear to me could even associate with such a sinister milieu.

And at three different times during our turbulent marriage strange girls, with the commonest of accents, telephoned to announce to me that Letch had sired their unborn children!!

Having the deepest of maternal instincts, my heart fairly bled when I thought of the darling pink and white `` bundles from heaven '' I would have proudly given my husband.

`` Ah, you're too old '', was invariably his ungallant and untrue retort whenever I suggested `` starting a family ''.

Letch had made it abundantly clear that he did not care for the company of my own precious daughter.

I now felt it wiser to keep Baby-dear in school and -- during the summers -- at a camp run by the Society of Friends all year around.

Her presence only made Letch more distant and irritable and, in the hurry of buying Chateau Belletch, I had neglected to consider a room for Baby-dear, so there was no place to put her, anyhow.

( I sometimes feel that God, in His infinite wisdom, wants us to have these inexplicable little lapses of memory.

It almost always works out for the best.

)

Yet I adored this man, Letch Feeley, why, I cannot say.

With faint heart and a brave smile, I endured his long absences from Chateau Belletch, his coldness, his indifference, his slights and his abuse.

The times I can recall when I was publicly humiliated by him -- lovely dinner parties in our Trianon Suite where the collation was postponed and postponed and postponed, only to be served dry and overcooked at a table where the host's chair was vacant;;

a `` splash party '' at the new pool, which I had built in the hope of keeping Letch away from public beaches, when Letch and a certain Aquacutie stayed underwater together for the better part of an hour;;

a lovely Epiphany party at Errol Flynn's, on which sacred occasion Letch stole away with an unknown `` starlet '', leaving me `` high and dry '' to get home as best I could.

These are but a sampling of the insults I endured.

As Mrs. Letch Feeley, was it any wonder that I, once the social arbiter of Filmdom, was excluded from the smart entertainments given by the Astaires, the Coopers, the Gables, the Colmans, the Rathbones, the Taylors, the Thalbergs and such devout, closely knit families as the Barrymores and the Crosbys??

As Letch's antisocial conduct increased, our invitations decreased and my heart was in my mouth whenever I played hostess at a fashionable `` screenland '' gathering.

Between 1935 and 1939 Letch and I made ten films together, each less successful, both artistically and commercially, than the one before it.

Our last joint venture, Sainted Lady, a deeply religious film based on the life of Mother Cabrini, and timed so that its release date would coincide with the beatification of America's first saint in November, 1938, was a fiasco from start to finish.

As I was playing Mother Cabrini, the picture was actually `` all mine '', with nearly every scene built around me.

But in order to keep Letch in the public eye and out of trouble, I wrote in a part especially for him -- that of a dashing ruffian who `` sees the light '' and is saved by the inspiring example of Mother Cabrini.

And did he appreciate my efforts on his behalf??

Did he trouble to memorize the very small part which I had `` tailor-made '' to his specifications, a role eventually cut down to three short speeches??

Did he show the rest of the cast -- numbering four thousand -- the consideration of arriving at the studio punctually -- or even at all??

He did not!!

The `` shooting '' went on for eight months!!

Most of our working days were spent on the telephone calling `` bookies '', illegal gambling dens, a certain `` residential club for young actresses '', more than a hundred different bars or the steam room of the athletic club.

Whenever he deigned to appear at the studio he was `` hung over '', uncooperative, rude and insulting.

He made many tasteless, irreverent and unfunny remarks, not only about me in the title role, but about religion in general.

By the time the film was released we were three million dollars over-spent, war was imminent and the public apparently had forgotten all about Mother Cabrini.

Thanks to Letch Feeley and the terrible strain he imposed on me, the notices were few and unfavorable.

Only George Santayana seemed to understand and appreciate the film when he wrote: `` Miss Poitrine has perpetrated the most eloquent argument for the Protestant faith yet unleashed by Hollywood ''.

But it was small consolation.

In a rare fit of anger and spite, I `` farmed out '' my own husband to a small and most undistinguished studio to make one picture as a form of punishment.

( An actor must have discipline.

) The film was called The Diet of Worms, which I felt was just what Letch deserved.

It turned out to be a life of Martin Luther, of all things!!

It was a disaster!!

In clothes, Letch simply did not project.

He was laughed off the screen.

At the same time, however, I availed myself of the services of that great English actor and master of make-up, Sir Gauntley Pratt, to do a `` quickie '' called The Mystery of the Mad Marquess, in which I played a young American girl who inherits a haunted castle on the English moors which is filled with secret passages and sliding panels and, unbeknownst to anyone, is still occupied by an eccentric maniac.

It was a `` potboiler '' made on a `` shoestring '' and not the sort of film I like, as all I had to do was look blank and scream a great deal.

My heart was not in it, but, oddly enough, it remains the most financially successful picture of my career.

( I watched it on television late one night last week and it `` stands up '' remarkably well, even twenty years later.

)

Letch had returned from his debacle unrepentant and more badly behaved than before.

I really loved that boy, and, in a feverish attempt to preserve our marriage and to try to revive the wonderful, wonderful person Letch had once been, I took my troubles to Momma, hoping that her earthy advice would help me.

`` If I could only think of something at the studio, near me, to absorb his boundless energy '', I said.

`` What is Letch interested in ''??

`` Bookies, booze and babes '', Momma said bluntly.

Her reply stung me, but this was too important to let my hurt make any difference.

`` I can't turn the studio into a gambling hell or a saloon '', I said.

Up to date, however, his garden was still more or less of a mess, he hadn't even started his workshop and if there was a meadow pond in the neighborhood he hadn't found it.

It wasn't his fault that these things were so.

The difficulty was that each day seemed to produce its quota of details which must be cleaned up immediately.

As a result, life had become a kind of continuous make-ready.

Once he disposed of these items which screamed so harshly for attention, he could undertake the things which really counted.

Then, at last, his day would fall into an ordered pattern and he would be free to read, or garden or just wander through the woods in the late afternoon, accompanied by his dogs.

His dogs??

He had almost forgotten them, although they had played such an important part in his early dreams.

Then they had always been romping around him on these walks, yelping with delight, dashing off into the bushes on fruitless hunting expeditions, returning to jump up on him triumphantly with muddy paws.

Dogs did something to one's ego.

They were constantly assuring you that you were one of the world's great guys.

Regardless of how much of a slob you knew yourself to be, you could be certain they would never find out -- and even if they did it would make no difference.

Now it became increasingly apparent that there were to be no dogs in the picture.

What in the world were you going to do with a lot of dogs when you left for town on Monday afternoons??

You certainly couldn't take them into the little apartment and if you tried to farm them out for two or three days every week they would become so confused that they would have nervous breakdowns.

Why in the world couldn't he live in one place the way everyone else seemed to??

It worried him, this inability to get the simplest things done in the course of a day.

He would wake up in the middle of the night and fret about it.

How in the world had he formerly found time to build up a business, raise a family, be on half a dozen boards, work actively on committees and either go out in the evening or plow through the contents of a bulging brief case??

Was it possible that as people grow older the nature of time changed??

Could it be that it speeded up for the aged in some mysterious way, as if a bored universe were skipping through the end of the chapter just to get it over with??

Or was the answer less metaphysical??

Did older people work more slowly??

Did it take a man of sixty-five longer to write a letter, shave, clean out a barn, read a newspaper, than a man of thirty??

Did men become perfectionists as they grew older, polishing, polishing, reluctant to let go??

It might be that certain people were born with a compulsion to complicate their lives, while others could live blissfully motionless almost indefinitely, like lizards in the sun, too indolent to blink their eyes.

Perhaps it was his misfortune, or good fortune, whichever way one looked at it, to belong to the former group, and he was struggling unconsciously to build up pressure in a world which demanded none, which was positively antagonistic to it.

And then again perhaps the reason why he couldn't find time to do any of the things he had planned to do after retirement: reading, roaming, gardening, lying on his back and watching the clouds go by, was because he didn't want to do them.

There was no compulsion behind them.

They could be done or left undone and nobody really gave a damn.

During all his busy life he had only done things which had to be done.

This habit had become so fixed over the years that it seemed futile to do anything for which no one was waiting.

He looked at the luminous dial of his wrist watch.

It was five minutes after four.

On some distant farm a rooster crowed and, far down the valley, an associate answered.

He turned over impatiently and pulled the sheet over his head against the treacherous encroachment of the dawn.

At least he could buy the equipment for his workshop.

Thus committed, action might follow.

He went down to Mills and Bradley's Hardware Store and bought a full set of carpenter's tools, including a rotary power saw and several other pieces of power machinery that Mr. Mills said were essential for babbiting and doweling, whatever they were.

He also bought a huge square of pegboard for hanging up his tools, and lumber for his workbench, sandpaper and glue and assorted nails, levels and T squares and plumb lines and several gadgets that he had no idea how to use or what they were for.

`` There '', said Mr. Mills.

`` That'll get you started.

Best not to get everything at once.

Add things as you find you need 'em ''.

He didn't even ask the cost of this collection.

After all, if you were going to set up a workshop you had to have the proper equipment and that was that.

When he returned home, the station wagon loaded with tools, Jinny had gone with a friend to some meeting in the village, using the recently purchased second car.

He was glad.

It gave him a chance to unload the stuff and get it down to the cellar without a barrage of acid comments.

He had made such a fuss about buying that second car that he knew he was vulnerable.

He piled everything neatly in a corner of the cellar and turned to stare at the blank stone wall.

That was where the pegboard would go on which he would hang his hand tools.

In front of it would be his workbench.

The old nightmare which had caused him so many wakeful hours came charging in on him once more, only this time he couldn't pacify it with a sleeping pill and send it away.

How in the world did one attach a pegboard to a stone wall??

How did one attach anything to a stone wall, for that matter??

After the pegboard there would be the paneling.

He sat down on an old box and focused on the problem.

Perhaps one bored holes in the stone with some kind of an electric gadget.

But then, when you stuck things into the holes, why didn't they come right out again??

It all seemed rather hopeless.

He turned his attention to the workbench.

Perhaps that was the first thing to do.

A workbench had a heavy top and sturdy legs, but how did you attach sturdy legs to a heavy top so that the whole thing didn't wobble like a newborn calf and ultimately collapse when you leaned on it??

Mr. Mills had done some figuring on a scrap of paper and given him the various kinds of boards and two-by-fours which, properly handled, would, he had assured him, turn into a workbench.

They lay on the cellar floor in a disorderly pile.

Mr. Crombie poked at it gingerly with his foot.

How could anyone know what to do with an assortment like that??

Perhaps he had better have someone help him put up the pegboard and build the workbench -- someone who knew what he was about.

Then at least he would have a place to hang his tools and something to work on.

After that everything should be simpler.

He went upstairs to phone Crumb.

To his amazement he reached him.

Mr. Crumb was laid up with a bad cold.

He didn't seem to think that attaching a pegboard to a stone wall was much of a problem and he tossed off the building of the worktable equally lightly.

The only trouble was that he himself was tied up on the school job.

That was why he hadn't been able to finish the porch.

No, he didn't know of any handyman-carpenter.

There wasn't any such thing any more.

Carpenters all wanted steady work and at the moment every mother's son for twenty miles around that could hammer nails for twenty-five dollars a day was working on the school job.

There was a fellow named Blatz over Smithtown way.

Nobody liked to hire him because you never could tell when he was going to be taken drunk.

Mr. Crumb would probably see him at Lodge Meeting the next night.

If he was sober, which was doubtful, he'd have him get in touch with Mr. Crombie.

Mr. Blatz had been at least sober enough to remember to telephone and he turned out to be the greatest boon that had come into Mr. Crombie's life since he moved to Highfield, in spite of the fact that he didn't work very fast or very long at a time, and he didn't like to work at all unless Mr. Crombie hung around and talked to him.

He said he was the lonely type and working in a cellar you saw funny things coming out of the cracks in the wall if they wasn't nobody with you.

So Mr. Crombie sat on a wooden box and talked in order to keep Mr. Blatz's mind from funny things.

At the same time he watched carefully to see how one attached pegboards to stone walls, but Mr. Blatz was usually standing in his line of vision and it all seemed so simple that he didn't like to disclose his ignorance.

While Mr. Blatz was putting up the pegboards and starting the workbench, Mr. Crombie told him of this idea about paneling the whole end of the cellar.

Mr. Blatz agreed that this would be pretty.

Without further discussion he appeared the next morning with a pile of boards sticking over the end of his light truck and proceeded with the paneling, which he then stained and waxed according to his taste.

`` Now '', he said, `` we got to put in some outlets for them power tools;;

then a couple of fluorescent lamps over the workbench an' I guess we're about through down here ''.

It all did look very efficient and shipshape.

There was no question of that.

`` By the way '', said Mr. Blatz, packing his tools into a battered carrier, `` them power tools needs extra voltage.

I guess you know about that.

Before you use 'em the light company's got to run in a heavy line and you'll need a new fuse box for the extra circuits.

That ain't too bad 'ceptin' the light company's so busy you can't ever get 'em to do nothin' ''.

Instead of being depressed by this news, Mr. Crombie was actually relieved.

At least the moment was postponed when he had to face the mystery of the power tools.

He followed Mr. Blatz up the cellar stairs.

As usual, Mrs. Crombie was standing in the midst of a confusion of cooking utensils.

Mr. Blatz sat down in the only unoccupied kitchen chair.

`` Well '', he said, `` got your man fixed up nice down there.

He oughta be able to build a new house with all them contraptions ''.

Mr. Crombie watched his wife with an anxious expression.

`` I was just sayin' to him that I'm all ready now for anything else you want done ''.

Mr. Crombie couldn't remember his saying any such thing.

`` Oh, that's wonderful '', cried Mrs. Crombie.

`` I have a thousand things for you to do.

Doors that won't open, and doors that won't close and shelves and broken -- ''

`` But those are the things I built the workshop for '', protested Mr. Crombie.

`` Those are the things I can do, now that I'm set up ''.

`` I've been waiting to get these things done for months '', she said.

`` We won't live long enough if I wait for you, besides which you don't need to worry -- there'll be plenty more ''.

But the discussion was academic.

Mr. Blatz was already taking measurements for a shelf above the kitchen sink.

Ambiguity

Nothing in English has been ridiculed as much as the ambiguous use of words, unless it be the ambiguous use of sentences.

Ben Franklin said, `` Clearly spoken, Mr. Fogg.

You explain English by Greek ''.

Richard Brinsley Sheridan said, `` I think the interpreter is the hardest to be understood of the two ''.

And a witty American journalist remarked over a century ago what is even more true today, `` Many a writer seems to think he is never profound except when he can't understand his own meaning ''.

There are many types of ambiguity and many of them have been described by rhetoricians under such names as amphibology, parisology, and other ologies.

In common parlance they would be described as misses -- misinterpreters, misunderstanders, misdirectors and kindred misdeeds.

One species of ambiguity tries to baffle by interweaving repetition.

`` Did you or did you not say what I said you said, because Jane said you never said what I said ''??

Another woman, addressing Christmas cards, said to her husband: `` We sent them one last year but they didn't send us one, so they probably won't send us one this year because they'll think we won't send them one because they didn't last year, don't you think, or shall we ''??

Such ambiguous exercises compound confusion by making it worse compounded, and they are sometimes expanded until the cream of the jest sours.

Ambiguity of a non-repetitious kind describes the dilemma one girl found herself in.

`` I'm terribly upset '', she told a girl-friend.

`` I wrote Bill in my last letter to forget that I had told him that I didn't mean to reconsider my decision not to change my mind -- and he seems to have misunderstood me ''.

Evidently Bill was another of those men who simply don't understand women.

Another case involves a newspaper reporter who tripped up a politician.

`` Mr. Jones, you may recall that we printed last week your denial of having retracted the contradiction of your original statement.

Now would you care to have us say that you were misquoted in regard to it ''??

Questions like this, framed in verbal fog, are perhaps the only kind that have ever stumped an experienced politician.

They recall Byron's classic comment: `` I wish he would explain his explanation ''.

Similarly, when a reporter once questioned Lincoln in cryptic fashion, Lincoln refused to make any further statement.

`` I fear explanations explanatory of things explained '', he said, leaving the biter bit -- and bitter.

The obscurity of politicians may not always be as innocent as it looks.

`` Senator '', said an interviewer, `` your constituents can't understand from your speech last night just how you stand on the question ''.

`` Good ''!!

Replied the Senator.

`` It took me five hours to write it that way ''.

The misplaced modifier is another species more honored in the observance of obscurity than in the breach.

This creates an amusing effect because its position in a sentence seems to make it apply to the wrong word.

A verse familiar to all grammarians is the quatrain: `` I saw a man once beat his wife When on a drunken spree.

Now can you tell me who was drunk -- The man, his wife, or me ''??

The `` wooden-leg '' gag of vaudeville, another standby of this sort, had endless variations.

`` There's a man outside with a wooden leg named Smith ''.

`` What's the name of his other leg ''??

Another stock vaudeville gag ran: `` Mother is home sick in bed with the doctor ''.

When radio came in, it continued the misplaced modifier in its routines as a standard device.

`` Do you see that pretty girl standing next to the car with slacks on ''??

`` I see the girl but I don't see the car with slacks on ''.

In recent years gagwriters have discovered this brand of blunder and thus the misplaced modifier has acquired a new habitat in the gagline.

In one cartoon a family is shown outside a theater with the head of the family addressing the doorman: `` Excuse me, but when we came out we found that we had left my daughter's handbag and my wife's behind ''.

Journalism supplies us with an endless run of such slips.

Not long ago a newspaper advised those taking part in a contest that `` snapshots must be of a person not larger than Af inches ''.

Classified ads are also chockfull of misrelated constructions.

Readers of the Reader's Digest are familiar with such items which often appear in its lists of verbal slips, like the ad in a California paper that advertised `` House for rent.

View takes in five counties, two bedrooms ''.

Since brevity is the soul of ambiguity as well as wit, newspaper headlines continually provide us with amusing samples.

`` Officials Meet on rubbish.

Many Shapes in bathtubs.

Son and Daughter of Local Couple Married ''.

Apart from misplaced modifiers and headlinese, journalism contributes a wide variety of comic ambiguities in both editorial and advertising matter.

A weekly newspaper reported a local romance: `` and the couple were married last Saturday, thus ending a friendship which began in their schooldays ''.

An item in the letters column of a newspaper renewed a subscription, adding: `` I personally enjoy your newspaper as much as my husband ''.

Then there was the caterer's ad which read: `` are you getting married or having an affair??

We have complete facilities to accommodate 200 people ''.

The newspaper too is the favorite habitat of the anatomical.

This slip is so-called because its semi-ambiguous English always seems to refer to a person's anatomy but never quite means what it seems to say.

Samples: He walked in upon her invitation.

She kissed him passionately upon his reappearance.

He kissed her back.

Not without good reason has the anatomical been called jocular journalese.

In news items a man is less often shot in the body or head than in the suburbs.

`` While Henry Morgan was escorting Miss Vera Green from the church social last Saturday night, a savage dog attacked them and bit Mr. Morgan on the public square ''.

Such items recall the California journalist who reported an accident involving a movie star: `` The area in which Miss N -- was injured is spectacularly scenic ''.

The double meaning in the anatomical made it a familiar vaudeville device, as in the gags of Weber and Fields.

When a witness at court was asked if he had been kicked in the ensuing rumpus, he replied, `` No, it was in the stomach ''.

Strangely enough, this always brought the house down.

Apart from journalese and vaudeville gags, the anatomical is also found in jocular literature.

A conscientious girl became the secretary of a doctor.

Her first day at work she was puzzled by an entry in the doctor's notes on an emergency case.

It read: `` Shot in the lumbar region ''.

After a moment of thought, her mind cleared and, in the interest of clarity, she typed into the record: `` Shot in the woods ''.

There are many grammatical misconstructions other than dangling modifiers and anatomicals which permit two different interpretations.

At the home of a gourmet the new maid was instructed in the fine points of serving.

`` I want the fish served whole, with head and tail '', the epicure explained, `` and serve it with lemon in mouth ''.

The maid demurred.

`` That's silly -- lemon in mouth '', she said.

But since the gourmet insisted that it is done that way at the most fashionable dinners, the girl reluctantly agreed.

So she brought the fish in whole, and she carried a lemon in her mouth.

Another specimen of such double-entendre is illustrated by a woman in a department store.

She said to the saleslady, `` I want a dress to put on around the house ''.

The puzzled saleslady inquired, `` How large is your house, Madam ''??

This saleslady was a failure in the dress department and was transferred to the shoe department.

When a customer asked for alligator shoes, she said, `` What size is your alligator ''??

The comic indefinite comprises an extensive class of comedy.

One species is restricted to statements which are neither explicit nor precise regarding a particular person, place, time or thing.

A woman met a famous author at a literary tea.

`` Oh, I'm so delighted to meet you '', she gushed.

`` It was only the other day that I saw something of yours, about something or other, in some magazine ''.

This baffling lack of distinct details recalls the secretary whose employer was leaving the office and told her what to answer if anyone called in his absence.

`` I may be back '', he explained, `` and then again, I may not ''.

The girl nodded understandingly.

`` Yes, sir '', she said, `` is that definite ''??

An old-fashioned mother said to her modern daughter, `` You must have gotten in quite late last night, dear.

Where were you ''??

The daughter replied, `` Oh, I had dinner with -- well, you don't know him but he's awfully nice -- and we went to a couple of places -- I don't suppose you've heard of them -- and we finished up at a cute little night club -- I forget the name of it.

Why, it's all right, isn't it, Mother ''??

Her woolly-minded parent agreed.

`` Of course, dear '', she said.

`` It's only that I like to know where you go ''.

No less ambiguous was the indefinity of a certain clergyman's sermon.

`` Dearly beloved '', he preached, `` unless you repent of your sins in a measure, and become converted to a degree, you will, I regret to say, be damned to a more or less extent ''.

This clergyman should have referred to Shakespeare's dictum: `` So-so is a good, very good, very excellent maxim.

And yet it is not.

It is but so-so ''.

Indefinite reference also carries double-meaning where an allusion to one person or thing seems to refer to another.

A news item described the launching of a ship: `` Completing the ceremony, the beautiful movie star smashed a bottle of champagne over her stern as she slid gracefully down the ways into the sea ''.

This is not unlike the order received by the sergeant of an army motor pool: `` Four trucks to Fort Mason gym, 7:30 tonight, for hauling girls to dance.

The bodies must be cleaned and seats wiped off ''.

A politician was approached by a man seeking the office of a minor public official who had just died.

`` What are my chances for taking Joe's place ''??

He asked.

`` If you can fix it up with the undertaker '', returned the politician, `` it's all right with me ''.

The manager of a movie theater received a telephone call from a woman who was equally indefinite.

`` What have you got on today ''??

She inquired.

`` A blue suit '', he answered.

`` Who's in it ''??

She continued.

`` I am '', he said.

There was a short pause for reflection.

`` Oh '', said the woman, `` I've seen that picture already ''.

Another brand of indefinite reference arises out of the use of the double verb.

When a question contains two verbs, the response does not make clear which of them is being answered.

The moonlit night was made for romance, and he had been looking at her soulfully for some time.

Finally he asked, `` Do you object to petting ''??

`` That's one thing I've never done '', she said promptly.

He thought a moment, then inquired, `` You mean petted ''??

`` No '', she smiled, `` objected ''.

Replies to requests for character reference are notorious for their evasive double-entendre.

It would be hard to find anything more equivocal than: `` I cannot recommend him too highly ''.

Another less ambiguous case read as follows: `` The bearer of this letter has served me for two years to his complete satisfaction.

If you are thinking of giving him a berth, be sure to make it a wide one ''.

In the comedy of indefinite reference, it-wit occupies a prominent place because of its frequent occurrence.

Ambiguity arises when the pronoun it carries a twofold reference.

Two friends were talking.

One said, `` When I get a cold I buy a bottle of whiskey for it, and within a few hours it's gone ''.

The speaker referred to the whiskey but his friend thought he meant the cold.

It-wit is a misnomer because it covers slips as well as wit.

An excited woman was making an emergency call over the phone: `` Doctor, please come over right away.

My husband is in great pain.

I called the other afternoon on my old friend, Graves Moreland, the Anglo-American literary critic -- his mother was born in Ohio -- who lives alone in a fairy-tale cottage on the Upson Downs, raising hell and peacocks, the former only when the venerable gentleman becomes an angry old man about the state of literature or something else that is dwindling and diminishing, such as human stature, hope, and humor.

My unscientific friend does not believe that human stature is measurable in terms of speed, momentum, weightlessness, or distance from earth, but is a matter of the development of the human mind.

After Gagarin became the Greatest Man in the World, for a nation that does not believe in the cult of personality or in careerism, Moreland wrote me a letter in which he said: `` I am not interested in how long a bee can live in a vacuum, or how far it can fly.

A bee's place is in the hive ''.

`` I have come to talk with you about the future of humor and comedy '', I told him, at which he started slightly, and then made us each a stiff drink, with a trembling hand.

`` I seem to remember '', he said, `` that in an interview ten years ago you gave humor and comedy five years to live.

Did you go to their funeral ''??

`` I was wrong '', I admitted.

`` Comedy didn't die, it just went crazy.

It has identified itself with the very tension and terror it once did so much to alleviate.

We now have not only what has been called over here the comedy of menace but we also have horror jokes, magazines known as Horror Comics, and sick comedians.

There are even publications called Sick and Mad.

The Zeitgeist is not crazy as a loon or mad as a March hare;;

it is manic as a man ''.

`` I woke up this morning '', Moreland said, `` paraphrasing Lewis Carroll.

Do you want to hear the paraphrase ''??

`` Can I bear it ''??

I asked, taking a final gulp of my drink, and handing him the empty glass.

`` Just barely '', he said, and repeated his paraphrase: `` The time has come '', the walrus said, `` To speak of manic things, Of shots and shouts, and sealing dooms Of commoners and kings ''.

Moreland fixed us each another drink, and said, `` For God's sake, tell me something truly amusing ''.

`` I'll try '', I said, and sat for a moment thinking.

`` Oh yes, the other day I reread some of Emerson's English Traits, and there was an anecdote about a group of English and Americans visiting Germany, more than a hundred years ago.

In the railway station at Berlin, a uniformed attendant was chanting,' Foreigners this way!!

Foreigners this way'!!

One woman -- she could have been either English or American -- went up to him and said,' But you are the foreigners' ''.

I took a deep breath and an even deeper swallow of my drink, and said, `` I admit that going back to Ralph Waldo Emerson for humor is like going to a modern musical comedy for music and comedy ''.

`` What's the matter with the music ''??

Moreland asked.

`` It doesn't drown out the dialogue '', I explained.

`` Let's talk about books '', Moreland said.

`` I am told that in America you have non-books by non-writers, brought out by non-publishers for non-readers.

Is it all non-fiction ''??

`` There is non-fiction and non non-fiction '', I said.

`` Speaking of nonism: the other day, in a story about a sit-down demonstration, the Paris Herald Tribune wrote,' The non-violence became noisier.

And then Eichmann was quoted as saying, in non-English, that Hitler's plan to exterminate the Jews was nonsense ''.

`` If we cannot tell evil, horror, and insanity from nonsense, what is the future of humor and comedy ''??

Moreland asked, grimly.

`` Cryptic '', I said.

`` They require, for existence, a brave spirit and a high heart, and where do you find these??

In our present era of Science and Angst, the heart has been downgraded, to use one of our popular retrogressive verbs ''.

`` I know what you mean '', Moreland sighed.

`` Last year your Tennessee Williams told our Dilys Powell, in a television program, that it is the task of the playwright to throw light into the dark corners of the human heart.

Like almost everybody else, he confused the heart, both as organ and as symbol, with the disturbed psyche, the deranged glands, and the jumpy central nervous system.

I'm not pleading for the heart that leaps up when it beholds a rainbow in the sky, or for the heart that with rapture fills and dances with the daffodils.

The sentimental pure heart of Galahad is gone with the knightly years, but I still believe in the heart of the George Meredith character that was not made of the stuff that breaks ''.

`` We no longer have Tom Moore's and Longfellow's' heart for any fate', either '', I said.

`` Moore and Longfellow didn't have the fate that faces us '', Moreland said.

`` One day our species promises co-existence, and the next day it threatens co-extinction ''.

We sat for a while drinking in silence.

`` The heart '', I said finally, `` is now either in the throat or the mouth or the stomach or the shoes.

When it was worn in the breast, or even on the sleeve, we at least knew where it was ''.

There was a long silence.

`` You have visited England five times in the past quarter-century, I believe '', my host said.

`` What has impressed you most on your present visit ''??

`` I would say depressed, not impressed '', I told him.

`` I should say it is the turning of courts of law into veritable theatres for sex dramas, involving clergymen and parishioners, psychiatrists and patients.

It is becoming harder and harder to tell law courts and political arenas from the modern theatre ''.

`` Do you think we need a new Henry James to re-explore the Anglo-American scene ''??

He asked.

`` Or perhaps a new Noel Coward ''??

`` But you must have heard it said that the drawing-room disappeared forever with the somnolent years of James and the antic heyday of Coward.

I myself hear it said constantly -- in drawing-rooms.

In them, there is usually a group of Anglo-Americans with tragicomic problems, worthy of being explored either in the novel or in the play or in comedy and satire ''.

I stood up and began pacing.

`` If you are trying to get us out of the brothel, the dustbin, the kitchen sink, and the tawdry living-room, you are probably wasting your time '', Moreland told me.

`` Too many of our writers seem to be interested only in creatures that crawl out of the woodwork or from under the rock ''.

`` Furiouser and furiouser '', I said.

`` I am worried about the current meanings of the word funny.

It now means ominous, as when one speaks of a funny sound in the motor;;

disturbing, as when one says that a friend is acting funny;;

and frightening, as when a wife tells the police that it is funny, but her husband hasn't been home for two days and nights ''.

Moreland sat brooding for a full minute, during which I made each of us a new drink.

He took his glass, clinked it against mine, and said, `` Toujours gai, what the hell ''!!

Borrowing a line from Don Marquis' Mehitabel.

`` Be careful of the word' gay', for it, too, has undergone a change.

It now means, in my country, homosexual '', I said.

`` Oh, I forgot to say that if one is taken to the funny house in the funny wagon, he is removed to a mental institution in an ambulance.

Recently, by the way, I received a questionnaire in which I was asked whether or not I was non-institutionalized ''.

My host went over and stared out the window at his peacocks;;

then he turned to me.

`` Is it true that you believe the other animals are saner than the human species ''??

`` Oh, that is demonstrable '', I told him.

`` Do you remember the woman in the French Alps who was all alone with her sheep one day when the sun darkened ominously??

She told the sheep,' The world is coming to an end'!!

And the sheep said -- all in unison, I have no doubt -- ba-a-a!!

The sound mockery of sheep is like the salubrious horse laugh ''.

`` That is only partly non-nonsense '', he began.

`` If you saw the drama called Rhinoceros '', I said, `` think of the effect it would have on an audience of rhinos when the actor on stage suddenly begins turning into a rhinoceros.

The rhinos would panic, screaming help!!

-- if that can be screamed in their language ''.

`` You think the Russians are getting ahead of us in comedy ''??

Moreland demanded.

`` Non-God, no '', I said.

`` The political and intellectual Left began fighting humor and comedy years ago, because they fear things they do not understand and cannot manage, such as satire and irony, such as humor and comedy.

Nevertheless, like any other human being upon whom the spotlight of the world plays continually, Khrushchev, the anti-personality cultist, has become a comic actor, or thinks he has.

In his famous meeting with Nixon a couple of years ago he seemed to believe that he was as funny as Ed Wynn.

But, like Caesar, he has only one joke, so far as I can find out.

It consists in saying,' That would be sending the goat to look after the cabbage.

Why in the name of his non-God doesn't he vary it a bit ''??

`` Such as ''??

Moreland asked.

`` Such as' sending the cat to guard the mice', or' the falcon to protect the dove', or most terribly sharp of all,' the human being to save humanity' ''.

`` You and I have fallen out of literature into politics '', Moreland observed.

`` What a nasty fall was there ''!!

I said.

Moreland went over to stare at his peacocks again, and then came back and sat down, restively.

`` The world that was once foot-loose and fancy-free '', he said, `` has now become screw-loose and frenzy-free.

In our age of Science and Angst it seems to me more brave to stay on Earth and explore inner man than to fly far from the sphere of our sorrow and explore outer space ''.

`` The human ego being what it is '', I put in, `` science fiction has always assumed that the creatures on the planets of a thousand larger solar systems than ours must look like gigantic tube-nosed fruit bats.

It seems to me that the first human being to reach one of these planets may well learn what it is to be a truly great and noble species ''.

`` Now we are leaving humor and comedy behind again '', Moreland protested.

`` Not in the largest sense of the words '', I said.

`` The other day Arnold Toynbee spoke against the inveterate tendency of our species to believe in the uniqueness of its religions, its ideologies, and its virtually everything else.

Why do we not realize that no ideology believes so much in itself as it disbelieves in something else??

Forty years ago an English writer, W. L. George, dealt with this subject in Eddies of the Day, and said, as an example, that' Saint George for Merry England' would not start a spirit half so quickly as' Strike frog-eating Frenchmen dead' ''!!

`` There was also Gott strafe Angleterre '', Moreland reminded me, `` and Carthago delenda est, or if you will, Deus strafe Carthage.

It isn't what the ideologist believes in, but what he hates, that puts the world in jeopardy.

This is the force, in our time and in every other time, that urges the paranoiac and the manic-depressive to become head of a state.

Complete power not only corrupts but it also attracts the mad.

There is a bitter satire for a future writer in that ''.

`` Great satire has always been clearly written and readily understandable '', I said.

`` But we now find writers obsessed by the nooks and crannies of their ivory towers, and curiously devoted to the growing obscurity and complexity of poetry and non-poetry.

I wrote a few years ago that one of the cardinal rules of writing is that the reader should be able to get some idea of what the story is about.

One day, the children had wanted to get up onto General Burnside's horse.

They wanted to see what his back felt like -- the General's.

He looked so comfortable being straight.

They wanted to touch the mystery.

Arlene was boosting them up when the policeman came by.

He was very rude.

Arlene had a hard voice, too, this time.

The policeman's eyes rather popped for a second;;

but then Arlene got another tone in a hurry, and she said, `` If it wasn't for these dear children '' --.

The policeman got a confused, funny look on his face, and he had answered kind of politely, `` Now, look here, lady: I know you got to entertain these kids and all.

But this is a public park and it's a city ordinance that the statues cannot be crawled on ''.

Arlene was so ashamed that she hung her head when she said, `` Yes, sir ''.

The policeman walked on, but he looked back once.

That had happened on the day when two other unusual things had occurred.

Arlene had taught them a new way to have fun in their little private area;;

and they had told their mother about the tumbles.

In matters of exact information, that kept her one step behind developments;;

and so they were consistently true to their principles.

`` Never mind '', Arlene had said, after the policeman had left, having pursued the usual unco-operative course of grownups.

`` Never mind.

I know something that is much more fun that we can do on our little lawn ''.

`` What is it ''??

Asked the children, whose reflexes and replies were invariably so admirably normal and predictable.

Maybe that was why they were cordial and loyal towards the unpredictability of Arlene.

`` Just you wait '', advised Arlene, echoing the dialogue in a recent British movie.

And when they had got to their little lawn, they had had a most twirlingly magnificent time.

First, Arlene had put them through some rapid somersaults.

They had protested that that wasn't any surprise.

`` Just you wait '', said Arlene again, as though she were discovering the pleasantly tingling insinuations of that handy little sturdy statement.

`` This is a warm-up ''.

`` Is it anything like cooked-over oatmeal ''??

Asked one of the children.

`` Not the least bit '', Arlene snapped.

One of the many things that was so nice about her was that she always took your questions seriously, particularly your very, very serious questions.

Those were especially the ones that all other grownups laughed at loudest.

She would sometimes even get a little hard on you, she took you so seriously.

But not hard for very long.

Just long enough to make you feel important.

`` Now '', said Arlene, eventually, making them both sit in formation on a big root of a live oak, the sort of root that divided itself and made their bottoms sag down and feel comfortable.

`` Now, we're going to be like what General Burnside and his horse make us think of ''.

The children looked at each other and sagged their bottoms down even more comfortably than ever.

Their curiosity went happily out of bounds.

Then, Arlene threw herself backwards and wiggled in a way that was just wonderful.

She held herself that way and turned her head towards them and laughed and winked.

`` Imagine being able to laugh and wink when you're like the top part of that picture frame at home '', one of them said.

They both laughed and winked back.

`` I'm General Burnside's horse, upside down '', Arlene said, sort of gaspingly, for her: even she had to breathe kind of funny when she was in that position.

She made General Burnside's horse's belly do so funny when it was upside down.

Then, she was back on her feet, winking and smiling that enormous smile( she had lots of wonderful big teeth that you never would have suspected she had when she was not smiling).

And she would wink and throw kisses.

They both tried to keep smiling and winking for a long time, but it made their lips and eyelids tremble.

But they kept on clapping for a long, long time.

`` This time '', Arlene said, and she even kept on wiggling a little bit while she was just talking, `` you're going to tell me what I am and what I'm doing.

It all has something to do with General Burnside and his horse ''.

This time, it was so grand;;

they could tell exactly what it was.

It was General Burnside's horse running in a circle.

His legs shook, and the shaking went right on up his body through his hips to his shoulders.

`` That's the General's horse '', one of them cried out.

The other remarked, in a happy laughter, `` That's a funny old horse ''.

The first one said, `` He sure does shake.

He's old ''.

Then there was the General kissing his wife.

They had to be told that one.

But it was even funnier after they had been told.

Their father, when he came back from those many business trips, just bumped their mother on the forehead with his lips and asked if anybody had thought to mix the martinis and put them in the electric icebox.

But not General Burnside.

He was the funniest man.

He never could keep still, even when he didn't move his feet.

Then, they had to get up and be General Burnside.

Or his horse.

All they could think of was to run around in circles, kicking their legs out.

It wasn't very funny.

Then, they said General Burnside was going to jump over his horse's head;;

and they did some somersaults.

But that wasn't very funny, either.

`` You ought to shake '', Arlene advised them.

And Arlene showed them how to begin.

She also taught them to sing `` I wish I could shimmy like my sister Kate ''.

That helped a lot.

They were clumsy, but they were beginning to catch on.

They also caught on a little bit on how to smile a lot without your lips trembling.

`` Imagine you won't get your allowance if you're caught not smiling -- or smiling with your lips trembling too much '', Arlene suggested.

That helped a great deal.

They were a little late in getting home.

`` I'm sorry, Mrs. Minks '', Arlene said in a tone so low you could hardly hear it.

My mother constituted herself the voice of all of us.

`` It's perfectly understandable, Arlene '', my mother said in a friendly way.

`` I suppose you all were playing and forgot ''??

`` Yes, ma'am '', the children chorused heartily.

We couldn't help laughing.

The children rushed off to get rid of their sweaters;;

and Arlene began tapping the kitchen door open.

`` Arlene's a good girl '', my uncle remarked to us;;

but he said it too soon, for it came out just before the tap to which the door responded.

That tap had a slight bangish quality.

`` She really is a dear little thing '', my mother agreed.

Her upper lip lifted slightly.

She was biting into a small red radish;;

and that action always caused her to lift her lip from the sting of the thing.

Also, she lived in continual fear of finding a white worm curled up in a neat, mean little heap at the white center of the radish.

She would try to see over the bulge of her cheeks and somewhat under her teeth to the place where she was biting.

It never worked, naturally;;

but it made her look unusual.

Also, when she had bitten off half of the small radish, she found the suspense unbearable;;

and she would snatch the finger-held half of the radish out to where she could inspect it.

One could hear a very faint, ladylike sigh of relief.

Actually, it was inaudible to anyone not expecting it.

But the warm joy of her brown eyes was open to the general public.

Later on, the children told her further about somersaulting.

`` It must be awfully good for them.

And awfully kind of Arlene '', she told us later.

`` But do you know something curious ''??

She added.

`` I reached into that funny little pocket that is high up on my dress.

I have no notion why I reached.

And I found a radish.

Was it an omen??

I thought for a second.

But I would not pamper myself in that silly way.

I opened the window and threw the radish out ''.

Then, my mother blushed at this small lie;;

for she knew and we knew that it was cowardice that had made one more radish that night just too impossible a strain.

Arlene became indispensable;;

nobody could have told why.

But she was.

It was in the air.

A friend of my father's came to dinner.

He was passing through town and phoned to say hello.

As a result, he was persuaded out to dinner.

As a matter of fact, this happened every four or five months.

Sometimes, he coincided with my father's being at home.

Sometimes, as at this juncture, he did not.

But he was always persuaded out.

He liked children, in a loathsome kind of way;;

the two youngest in our family always had to be brought in and put through tricks for his entertainment.

When he had left, I could never remember whether he had poked them in their middles, laughingly, with a thick index finger or whether he was merely so much the sort of person who did this that one assumed the action, not bothering to look.

The children loathed him, too.

This evening, they were pushed in from the breakfast room, with odds and ends of dessert distributed over them.

There had been some coconut in it, for I remember my mother's taking a quick glance at a stringy bit of this nut on the cheek of one of them and then putting down her radish with a shiver.

They were pushed gently into the room by Arlene -- whose only part appearing were hands that crept quickly back around to the kitchen side of the door.

We had just sat down.

`` Tell Mr. Gorboduc what you're doing these days '', my mother advised the children, ceremonially.

There was an air of revolt about the children -- even irreverence for their own principles.

This could be told chiefly from a sort of head-tossing and prancing, a horselike balkiness of demeanor.

Possibly, the coconut-containing dessert had brought up bitter problems of administration.

But, at the beginning, this stayed just in the air.

`` We go to the park with this nice lady '', one of them said.

`` We have good times ''.

This happy bulletin convulsed Mr. Gorboduc.

`` You do ''??

He asked, between wheezes of laughter.

He was forced to wipe his eyes.

`` You don't step on the flowers, do you??

Eh ''??

One of the children maneuvered out of range of the poking index finger.

`` No '', he said.

`` We don't ''.

Mr. Gorboduc took a swig of his sherry.

He was so long thinking that my mother had time to inspect her sherry for dregs.

Usually, this was done when attention was diverted by someone else's long, boring story.

But this time she was nervous: she was open.

Mr. Gorboduc was finally in command of his mind again.

`` Tell me -- what do you do at the park ''??

He asked.

This was delivered in a forthright way, without coyness and over-pretended interest -- an admirable way with children.

Only, unfortunately, he could not remove from his voice a nagging insinuation of the direct command.

This nettled the children into the revelation of exact truth, a sacrifice of their secret superiority over grown people, but a victory in the wide fields of perpetration and illegitimate accomplishment.

`` We bump '', one said;;

and the other went on to development of the idea.

`` We grind, too '', he said.

My mother was beside herself with curiosity.

`` Say that again '', she pleaded.

She laughed a little and tossed the dregs rakishly around in her glass.

`` You what ''??

She could see that Mr. Gorboduc was intrigued;;

the hostess in her took over.

She was rollickingly happy.

`` You what ''??

My uncle looked at Mr. Gorboduc.

He read Henry James and used to pretend profundity through eye-beamings at people.

Mr. Gorboduc looked down.

He would not look up.

He was very funny about the whole thing.

Pueri aquam de silvas ad agricolas portant, a delightful vignette set in the unforgettable epoch of pre-Punic War Rome.

Marcellus, the hero, is beset from all sides by the problems of approaching manhood.

The story opens on the eve of his fifty-third birthday, as he prepares for the two weeks of festivities that are to follow.

Suddenly, a messenger arrives and, just before collapsing dead at his feet, informs him that the Saracens have invaded Silesia, the home province of his affianced.

He at once cancels the celebrations and, buckling on his scimitar, stumbles blindly from the house, where he is hit and killed by a passing oxcart.

The Albany Civic Opera's presentation of Spumoni's immortal Il Sevigli del Spegititgninino, with guest contralto Hattie Sforzt.

An unusual, if not extraordinary, rendering of the classic myth that involves the rescue of Prometheus from the rock by the U.S. Cavalry was given last week in the warehouse of the Albany Leather Conduit Company amid cheers of `` Hubba hubba '' and `` Yalagaloo pip pip ''!!

After a `` busy '' overture, the curtain rises on a farm scene -- the Ranavan Valley in northern Maine.

A dead armadillo, the sole occupant of the stage, symbolizes the crisis and destruction of the Old Order.

Old Order, acted and atonally sung by Grunnfeu Arapacis, the lovely Serbantian import, then entered and delivered the well-known invocation to the god Phineoppus, whereupon the stage is quite unexpectedly visited by a company of wandering Gorshek priests, symbolizing Love, Lust, Prudence and General Motors, respectively.

According to the myth, Old Order then vanishes at stage left and reappears at extreme stage right, but Director Shuz skillfully sidesteps the rather gooshey problem of stage effects by simply having Miss Arapacis walk across the stage.

The night he saw it, a rather unpleasant situation arose when the soloist refused to approach the armadillo, complaining -- in ad-lib -- that `` it smelled ''.

We caught the early train to New York.

The Dharma Dictionary, a list of highly unusual terms used in connection with Eurasian proto-senility cults.

It's somewhat off the beaten track, to be sure, but therein lies its variety and charm.

For example, probably very few people know that the word `` visrhanik '' that is bantered about so much today stems from the verb `` bouanahsha '': to salivate.

Likewise, and equally fascinating, is the news that such unlikely synonyms as `` pratakku '', `` sweathruna '', and the tongue-twister `` nnuolapertar-it-vuh-karti-birifw- '' all originated in the same village in Bathar-on-Walli Province and are all used to express sentiments concerning British `` imperialism ''.

The terms are fairly safe to use on this side of the ocean, but before you start spouting them to your date, it might be best to find out if he was a member of Major Pockmanster's Delhi Regiment, since resentment toward the natives was reportedly very high in that outfit.

The breeze and chancellor Neitzbohr, a movie melodrama that concerns the attempts of a West German politician to woo a plaster cast of the Apollo Belvedere.

As you have doubtless guessed already, the plot is plastered with Freudian, Jungian, and Meinckian theory.

For example, when the film is only four minutes old, Neitzbohr refers to a small, Victorian piano stool as `` Wilhelmina '', and we are thereupon subjected to a flashback that informs us that this very piano stool was once used by an epileptic governess whose name, of course, was Doris( the English equivalent, when passed through middle-Gaelic derivations, of Wilhelmina).

For the remainder of the movie, Chancellor Neitzbohr proceeds to lash the piano stool with a slat from a Venetian blind that used to hang in the pre-war Reichstag.

In this manner, he seeks to expunge from his own soul the guilt pangs caused by his personal assaults against the English at Dunkirk.

As we find out at the end, it is not the stool( symbolizing Doris, therefore the English) that he is punishing but the piece of Venetian blind.

And, when the slat finally shatters, we see him count the fragments, all the while muttering, `` He loves me, he loves me not ''.

After a few tortuous moments of wondering who `` he '' is, the camera pans across the room to the plaster statue, and we realize that Neitzbohr is trying to redeem himself in the eyes of a mute piece of sculpture.

The effect, needless to say, is almost terrifying, and though at times a bit obscure, the film is certainly a much-needed catharsis for the `` repressed '' movie-goer.

The music of Bini SalFininistas, capital LP Ab63711-r, one of the rare recordings of this titanic, yet unsung, composer.

Those persons who were lucky enough to see and hear the performance of his work at the Brest-Silevniov Festival in August, 1916, will certainly welcome his return to public notice;;

and it is not unlikely that, even as the great Bach lay dormant for so many years, so has the erudite, ingenious SalFininistas passed through his `` purgatory '' of neglect.

But now, under the guidance of the contemporary composer Marc Schlek, Jr., a major revival is under way.

As he leads the Neurenschatz Skolkau Orchestra, Schlek gives a tremendously inspired performance of both the Baslot and Rattzhenfuut concertos, including the controversial Tschilwyk cadenza, which was included at the conductor's insistence.

A major portion of the credit should also go to flautist Haumd for his rendering of the almost impossible `` Indianapolis '' movement in the Baslot.

Not only was Haumd's intonation and phrasing without flaw, but he seemed to take every tonal eccentricity in stride.

For example, to move( as the score requires) from the lowest F-major register up to a barely audible N minor in four seconds, not skipping, at the same time, even one of the 407 fingerings, seems a feat too absurd to consider, and it is to the flautist's credit that he remained silent throughout the passage.

We would have preferred, however, to have had the rest of the orchestra refrain from laughing at this and other spots on the recording, since it mars an otherwise sober, if not lofty, performance.

As Broadway itself becomes increasingly weighted down by trite, heavy-handed, commercially successful musicals and inspirational problem dramas, the American theatre is going through an inexorable renaissance in that nebulous area known as `` off-Broadway ''.

For the last two years, this frontier of the arts has produced a number of so-called `` non-dramas '' which have left indelible, bittersweet impressions on the psyche of this veteran theatregoer.

The latest and, significantly, greatest fruit of this theatrical vine is The, an adaptation of Basho's classic frog-haiku by Roger Entwhistle, a former University of Maryland chemistry instructor.

Although the play does show a certain structural amateurishness( there are eleven acts varying in length from twenty-five seconds to an hour and a half), the statement it makes concerning the ceaseless yearning and searching of youth is profound and worthy of our attention.

The action centers about a group of outspoken and offbeat students sitting around a table in a cafeteria and their collective and ultimately fruitless search for a cup of hot coffee.

They are relentlessly rebuffed on all sides by a waitress, the police, and an intruding government tutor.

The innocence that they tried to conceal at the beginning is clearly destroyed forever when one of them, asking for a piece of lemon-meringue pie, gets a plate of English muffins instead.

Leaving the theatre after the performance, I had a flash of intuition that life, after all( as Rilke said), is just a search for the nonexistent cup of hot coffee, and that this unpretentious, moving, clever, bitter slice of life was the greatest thing to happen to the American theatre since Brooks Atkinson retired.

Aging but still precocious, French feline enfant terrible Francoisette Lagoon has succeeded in shocking jaded old Paris again, this time with a sexy ballet scenario called The Lascivious Interlude, the story of a nymphomaniac trip-hammer operator who falls hopelessly in love with a middle-aged steam shovel.

A biting, pithy parable of the all-pervading hollowness of modern life, the piece has been set by Mlle Lagoon to a sumptuous score( a single motif played over and over by four thousand French horns) by existentialist hot-shot Jean-Paul Sartre.

Petite, lovely Yvette Chadroe plays the nymphomaniac engagingly.

Ever since Bambi, and, more recently, Born Free, there have been a lot of books about animals, but few compare with Max Fink's wry, understated, charming, and immensely readable My Friend, the Quizzical Salamander.

Done in the modern style of a `` confession '', Fink tells in exquisite detail how he came to know, and, more important, love his mother's pet salamander, Alicia.

It is not an entirely happy book, as Mrs. Fink soon becomes jealous of Alicia and, in retaliation, refuses to continue to scrape the algae off her glass.

Max, in a fit of despair, takes Alicia and runs off for two marvelous weeks in Burbank( Fink calls it `` the most wonderful and lovely fourteen days in my whole life ''), at the end of which Alicia tragically contracts Parkinson's disease and dies.

This brief resume hardly does the book justice, but I heartily recommend it to all those who are engages with the major problems of our time.

Opera in the Grand Tradition, along with mah-jongg, seems to be staging a well-deserved comeback.

In this country, the two guiding lights are, without doubt, Felix Fing and Anna Pulova.

Fing, a lean, chiseled, impeccable gentleman of the old school who was once mistaken on the street for Sir Cedric Hardwicke, is responsible for the rediscovery of Verdi's earliest, most raucous opera, Nabisco, a sumptuous bout-de-souffle with a haunting leitmotiv that struck me as being highly reminiscent of the Mudugno version of `` Volare ''.

Miss Pulova has a voice that Maria Callas once described as `` like chipping teeth with a screw driver '', and her round, opalescent face becomes fascinatingly reflective of the emotions demanded by the role of Rosalie.

The Champs Elysees is literally littered this summer with the prostrate bodies of France's beat-up beatnik jeunes filles.

Cause of all this commotion: squat, pug-nosed, balding, hopelessly ugly Jean-Pierre Bravado, a Bogartian figure, who plays a sadistic, amoral, philosophic Tasti-Freeze salesman in old New-Waver Fredrico de Mille Rossilini's endlessly provocative film, A Sour Sponge.

Bravado has been alternately described as `` a symbol of the new grandeur of France and myself ''( De Gaulle) and `` a decadent, disgusting slob ''!!

( Norman Mailer), but no one can deny that the screen crackles with electricity whenever he is on it.

Soaring to stardom along with him, Margo Felicity Brighetti, a luscious and curvaceously beguiling Italian starlet, turns in a creditable performance as an airplane mechanic.

The battle of the drib-drool continues, but most of New York's knowing sophisticates of Abstract Expressionism are stamping their feet impatiently in expectation of V( for Vindication) Day, September first, when Augustus Quasimodo's first one-man show opens at the Guggenheim.

We have heard that after seeing Mr. Quasimodo's work it will be virtually impossible to deny the artistic validity and importance of the whole abstract movement.

And it is thought by many who think about such things that Quasimodo is the logical culmination of a school that started with Monet, progressed through Kandinsky and the cubist Picasso, and blossomed just recently in Pollock and De Kooning.

Quasimodo defines his own art as `` the search for what is not there ''.

`` I paint the nothing '', he said once to Franz Kline and myself, `` the nothing that is behind the something, the inexpressible, unpaintable' tick' in the unconscious, the' spirit' of the moment resting forever, suspended like a huge balloon, in non-time ''.

It is his relentlessness and unwaivering adherence to this revolutionary artistic philosophy that has enabled him to paint such pictures as `` The Invasion of Cuba ''.

In this work, his use of non-color is startling and skillful.

The sweep of space, the delicate counterbalance of the white masses, the over-all completeness and unity, the originality and imagination, all entitle it to be called an authentic masterpiece.

I asked Quasimodo recently how he accomplished this, and he replied that he had painted his model `` a beautiful shade of red and then had her breathe on the canvas '', which was his typical tongue-in-cheek way of chiding me for my lack of sensitivity.

Dear Sirs: Let me begin by clearing up any possible misconception in your minds, wherever you are.

The collective by which I address you in the title above is neither patronizing nor jocose but an exact industrial term in use among professional thieves.

It is, I am reliably given to understand, the technical argot for those who engage in your particular branch of the boost;;

i.e., burglars who rob while the tenants are absent, in contrast to hot-slough prowlers, those who work while the occupants are home.

Since the latter obviously require an audacity you do not possess, you may perhaps suppose that I am taunting you as socially inferior.

Far from it;;

I merely draw an etymological distinction, hoping that specialists and busy people like you will welcome such precision in a layman.

Above all, disabuse yourselves of any thought that I propose to vent moral indignation at your rifling my residence, to whimper over the loss of a few objets d'art, or to shame you into rectitude.

My object, rather, is to alert you to an aspect or two of the affair that could have the gravest implications for you, far beyond the legal sanctions society might inflict.

You have unwittingly set in motion forces so malign, so vindictive, that it would be downright inhumane of me not to warn you about them.

Quite candidly, fellows, I wouldn't be in your shoes for all the rice in China.

As you've doubtless forgotten the circumstances in the press of more recent depredations, permit me to recapitulate them briefly.

Sometime on Saturday evening, August 22nd, while my family and I were dining at the Hostaria dell' Orso, in Rome, you jimmied a window of our home in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, and let yourselves into the premises.

Hastening to the attic, the temperature of which was easily hotter than the Gold Coast, you proceeded to mask the windows with a fancy wool coverlet, some khaki pants, and the like, and to ransack the innumerable boxes and barrels stored there.

What you were looking for( unless you make a hobby of collecting old tennis rackets and fly screens) eludes me, but to judge from phonograph records scattered about a fumed-oak Victrola.

You danced two tangos and a paso doble, which must have been fairly enervating in that milieu.

You then descended one story, glommed a television set from the music room -- the only constructive feature of your visit, by the way -- and, returning to the ground floor, entered the master bedroom.

From the curio cabinet on its south wall and the bureaus beneath, you abstracted seventeen ivory, metal, wood, and stone sculptures of Oriental and African origin, two snuffboxes, and a jade-handled magnifying glass.

Rummaging through a stack of drawers nearby, you unearthed an antique French chess set in ivory and sandalwood, which, along with two box Kodaks, you added to your haul.

Then, having wrapped the lot in an afghan my dog customarily slept on, you lammed out the front door, considerately leaving it open for neighbors to discover.

So much for the tiresome facts, as familiar to you, I'm sure, as to the constables and state troopers who followed in your wake.

The foregoing, aided by several clues I'll withhold to keep you on your toes, will pursue you with a tenacity worthy of Inspector Javert, but before they close in, gird yourselves, I repeat, for a vengeance infinitely more pitiless.

Fourteen of the sculptures you took possess properties of a most curious and terrifying nature, as you will observe when your limbs begin to wither and your hair falls out in patches.

In time, these minor manifestations will multiply and effloresce, riddling you with frambesia, the king's evil, sheep rot, and clonic spasm, until your very existence becomes a burden and you cry out for release.

All this, though, is simply a prelude, a curtain-raiser, for what ensues, and I doubt whether any Occidental could accurately forecast it.

If, however, it would help to intensify your anguish, I can delimit the powers of a few of the divinities you've affronted and describe the punishment they meted out in one analogous instance.

Hold on tight.

First of all, the six figures of the Buddha you heisted -- four Siamese heads, a black obsidian statuette in the earth-touching position, and a large brass figure of the Dying Buddha on a teakwood base.

Now, you probably share the widespread Western belief that the Lord Buddha is the most compassionate of the gods, much more so than Jehovah and Allah and the rest.

'fess up -- don't you??

Well, ordinarily he is, except( as the Wheel of the Law specifies) toward impious folk who steal, disturb, or maltreat the Presence.

Very peculiar retribution indeed seems to overtake such jokers.

Eight or ten years ago, a couple of French hoods stole a priceless Khmer head from the Musee Guimet, in Paris, and a week later crawled into the Salpetriere with unmistakable symptoms of leprosy.

Hell's own amount of chaulmoogra oil did nothing to alleviate their torment;;

they expired amid indescribable fantods, imploring the Blessed One to forgive their desecration.

Any reputable French interne can supply you with a dozen similar instances, and I'll presently recount a case out of my own personal experience, but, for the moment, let's resume our catalogue.

Whether the pair of Sudanese ivory carvings you lifted really possess the juju to turn your livers to lead, as a dealer in Khartoum assured me, I am not competent to say.

Likewise the ivory Chinese female figure known as a `` doctor lady ''( provenance Honan);;

a friend of mine removing her from the curio cabinet for inspection was felled as if by a hammer, but he had previously drunk a quantity of applejack.

The three Indian brass deities, though -- Ganessa, Siva, and Krishna -- are an altogether different cup of tea.

They hail from Travancore, a state in the subcontinent where Kali, the goddess of death, is worshiped.

Have you ever heard of Thuggee??

Nuf sed.

But it is the wooden sculpture from Bali, the one representing two men with their heads bent backward and their bodies interlaced by a fish, that I particularly call to your attention.

Oddly enough, this is an amulet against housebreakers, presented to the mem and me by a local rajah in 1949.

Inscribed around its base is a charm in Balinese, a dialect I take it you don't comprehend.

Neither do I, but the Tjokorda Agoeng was good enough to translate, and I'll do as much for you.

Whosoever violates our rooftree, the legend states, can expect maximal sorrow.

The teeth will rain from his mouth like pebbles, his wife will make him cocu with fishmongers, and a trolley car will grow in his stomach.

Furthermore -- and this, to me, strikes an especially warming note -- it shall avail the vandals naught to throw away or dispose of their loot.

The cycle of disaster starts the moment they touch any belonging of ours, and dogs them unto the forty-fifth generation.

Sort of remorseless, isn't it??

Still, there it is.

Now, you no doubt regard the preceding as pap;;

you're tooling around full of gage in your hot rods, gorging yourselves on pizza and playing pinball in the taverns and generally behaving like Ubermenschen.

In that case, listen to what befell another wisenheimer who tangled with our joss.

A couple of years back, I occupied a Village apartment whose outer staircase contained the type of niche called a `` coffin turn ''.

In it was a stone Tibetan Buddha I had picked up in Bombay, and occasionally, to make merit, my wife and I garlanded it with flowers or laid a few pennies in its lap.

After a while, we became aware that the money was disappearing as fast as we replenished it.

Our suspicions eventually centered, by the process of elimination, on a grocer's boy, a thoroughly bad hat, who delivered cartons to the people overhead.

The more I probed into this young man's activities and character, the less savory I found him.

I learned, for example, that he made a practice of yapping at dogs he encountered and, in winter, of sprinkling salt on the icy pavement to scarify their feet.

His energy was prodigious;;

sometimes he would be up before dawn, clad as a garbage collector and hurling pails into areaways to exasperate us, and thereafter would hurry to the Bronx Zoo to grimace at the lions and press cigar butts against their paws.

Evenings, he was frequently to be seen at restaurants like Enrico& Paglieri's or Peter's Backyard drunkenly donning ladies' hats and singing `` O Sole Mio ''.

In short, and to borrow an arboreal phrase, slash timber.

Well, the odious little toad went along chivying animals and humans who couldn't retaliate, and in due course, as was inevitable, overreached himself.

One morning, we discovered not only that the pennies were missing from the idol but that a cigarette had been stubbed out in its lap.

`` Now he's bought it '', said my wife contentedly.

`` No divinity will hold still for that.

He's really asking for it ''.

And how right she was.

The next time we saw him, he was a changed person;;

he had aged thirty years, and his face, the color of tallow, was crisscrossed with wrinkles, as though it had been wrapped in chicken wire.

Some sort of nemesis was haunting his footsteps, he told us in a quavering voice -- either an ape specter or Abe Spector, a process-server, we couldn't determine which.

His eyes had the same dreadful rigid stare as Dr. Grimesby Roylott's when he was found before his open safe wearing the speckled band.

The grocery the youth worked for soon tired of his depressing effect on customers, most of whom were sufficiently neurotic without the threat of incubi, and let him go.

The beautiful, the satisfying part of his disintegration, however, was the masterly way the Buddha polished him off.

Reduced to beggary, he at last got a job as office boy to a television producer.

His hubris, deficiency of taste, and sadism carried him straightaway to the top.

He evolved programs that plumbed new depths of bathos and besmirched whole networks, and quickly superseded his boss.

Not long ago, I rode down with him in an elevator in Radio City;;

he was talking to himself thirteen to the dozen and smoking two cigars at once, clearly a man in extremis.

`` See that guy ''??

The operator asked pityingly.

`` I wouldn't be in his shoes for all the rice in China.

There's some kind of a nemesis haunting his footsteps ''.

However one looks at it, therefore, I'd say that your horoscope for this autumn is the reverse of rosy.

The inventory you acquired from me isn't going to be easy to move;;

you can't very well sidle up to people on the street and ask if they want to buy a hot Bodhisattva.

Additionally, since you're going to be hors de combat pretty soon with sprue, yaws, Delhi boil, the Granville wilt, liver fluke, bilharziasis, and a host of other complications of the hex you've aroused, you mustn't expect to be lionized socially.

My advice, if you live long enough to continue your vocation, is that the next time you're attracted by the exotic, pass it up -- it's nothing but a headache.

As you can count on me to do the same.

Compassionately yours,

S. J. Perelman

revulsion in the desert

the doors of the D train slid shut, and as I dropped into a seat and, exhaling, looked up across the aisle, the whole aviary in my head burst into song.

She was a living doll and no mistake -- the blue-black bang, the wide cheekbones, olive-flushed, that betrayed the Cherokee strain in her Midwestern lineage, and the mouth whose only fault, in the novelist's carping phrase, was that the lower lip was a trifle too voluptuous.

From what I was able to gauge in a swift, greedy glance, the figure inside the coral-colored boucle dress was stupefying.

The Fulton County Grand Jury said Friday an investigation of Atlanta's recent primary election produced `` no evidence '' that any irregularities took place.

The jury further said in term-end presentments that the City Executive Committee, which had over-all charge of the election, `` deserves the praise and thanks of the City of Atlanta '' for the manner in which the election was conducted.

The September-October term jury had been charged by Fulton Superior Court Judge Durwood Pye to investigate reports of possible `` irregularities '' in the hard-fought primary which was won by Mayor-nominate Ivan Allen Jr..

`` Only a relative handful of such reports was received '', the jury said, `` considering the widespread interest in the election, the number of voters and the size of this city ''.

The jury said it did find that many of Georgia's registration and election laws `` are outmoded or inadequate and often ambiguous ''.

It recommended that Fulton legislators act `` to have these laws studied and revised to the end of modernizing and improving them ''.

The grand jury commented on a number of other topics, among them the Atlanta and Fulton County purchasing departments which it said `` are well operated and follow generally accepted practices which inure to the best interest of both governments ''.

Merger proposed

However, the jury said it believes `` these two offices should be combined to achieve greater efficiency and reduce the cost of administration ''.

The City Purchasing Department, the jury said, `` is lacking in experienced clerical personnel as a result of city personnel policies ''.

It urged that the city `` take steps to remedy '' this problem.

Implementation of Georgia's automobile title law was also recommended by the outgoing jury.

It urged that the next Legislature `` provide enabling funds and re-set the effective date so that an orderly implementation of the law may be effected ''.

The grand jury took a swipe at the State Welfare Department's handling of federal funds granted for child welfare services in foster homes.

`` This is one of the major items in the Fulton County general assistance program '', the jury said, but the State Welfare Department `` has seen fit to distribute these funds through the welfare departments of all the counties in the state with the exception of Fulton County, which receives none of this money.

The jurors said they realize `` a proportionate distribution of these funds might disable this program in our less populous counties ''.

Nevertheless, `` we feel that in the future Fulton County should receive some portion of these available funds '', the jurors said.

`` Failure to do this will continue to place a disproportionate burden '' on Fulton taxpayers.

The jury also commented on the Fulton ordinary's court which has been under fire for its practices in the appointment of appraisers, guardians and administrators and the awarding of fees and compensation.

Wards protected

The jury said it found the court `` has incorporated into its operating procedures the recommendations '' of two previous grand juries, the Atlanta Bar Association and an interim citizens committee.

`` These actions should serve to protect in fact and in effect the court's wards from undue costs and its appointed and elected servants from unmeritorious criticisms '', the jury said.

Regarding Atlanta's new multi-million-dollar airport, the jury recommended `` that when the new management takes charge Jan. 1 the airport be operated in a manner that will eliminate political influences ''.

The jury did not elaborate, but it added that `` there should be periodic surveillance of the pricing practices of the concessionaires for the purpose of keeping the prices reasonable ''.

Ask jail deputies

On other matters, the jury recommended that:( 1)

Four additional deputies be employed at the Fulton County Jail and `` a doctor, medical intern or extern be employed for night and weekend duty at the jail ''.

( 2)

Fulton legislators `` work with city officials to pass enabling legislation that will permit the establishment of a fair and equitable '' pension plan for city employes.

The jury praised the administration and operation of the Atlanta Police Department, the Fulton Tax Commissioner's Office, the Bellwood and Alpharetta prison farms, Grady Hospital and the Fulton Health Department.

Mayor William B. Hartsfield filed suit for divorce from his wife, Pearl Williams Hartsfield, in Fulton Superior Court Friday.

His petition charged mental cruelty.

The couple was married Aug. 2, 1913.

They have a son, William Berry Jr., and a daughter, Mrs. J. M. Cheshire of Griffin.

Attorneys for the mayor said that an amicable property settlement has been agreed upon.

The petition listed the mayor's occupation as `` attorney '' and his age as 71.

It listed his wife's age as 74 and place of birth as Opelika, Ala..

The petition said that the couple has not lived together as man and wife for more than a year.

The Hartsfield home is at 637 E. Pelham Rd. Aj.

Henry L. Bowden was listed on the petition as the mayor's attorney.

Hartsfield has been mayor of Atlanta, with exception of one brief interlude, since 1937.

His political career goes back to his election to city council in 1923.

The mayor's present term of office expires Jan. 1.

He will be succeeded by Ivan Allen Jr., who became a candidate in the Sept. 13 primary after Mayor Hartsfield announced that he would not run for reelection.

Georgia Republicans are getting strong encouragement to enter a candidate in the 1962 governor's race, a top official said Wednesday.

Robert Snodgrass, state GOP chairman, said a meeting held Tuesday night in Blue Ridge brought enthusiastic responses from the audience.

State Party Chairman James W. Dorsey added that enthusiasm was picking up for a state rally to be held Sept. 8 in Savannah at which newly elected Texas Sen. John Tower will be the featured speaker.

In the Blue Ridge meeting, the audience was warned that entering a candidate for governor would force it to take petitions out into voting precincts to obtain the signatures of registered voters.

Despite the warning, there was a unanimous vote to enter a candidate, according to Republicans who attended.

When the crowd was asked whether it wanted to wait one more term to make the race, it voted no -- and there were no dissents.

The largest hurdle the Republicans would have to face is a state law which says that before making a first race, one of two alternative courses must be taken: 1

Five per cent of the voters in each county must sign petitions requesting that the Republicans be allowed to place names of candidates on the general election ballot, or 2

The Republicans must hold a primary under the county unit system -- a system which the party opposes in its platform.

Sam Caldwell, State Highway Department public relations director, resigned Tuesday to work for Lt. Gov. Garland Byrd's campaign.

Caldwell's resignation had been expected for some time.

He will be succeeded by Rob Ledford of Gainesville, who has been an assistant more than three years.

When the gubernatorial campaign starts, Caldwell is expected to become a campaign coordinator for Byrd.

The Georgia Legislature will wind up its 1961 session Monday and head for home -- where some of the highway bond money it approved will follow shortly.

Before adjournment Monday afternoon, the Senate is expected to approve a study of the number of legislators allotted to rural and urban areas to determine what adjustments should be made.

Gov. Vandiver is expected to make the traditional visit to both chambers as they work toward adjournment.

Vandiver likely will mention the $100 million highway bond issue approved earlier in the session as his first priority item.

Construction bonds

Meanwhile, it was learned the State Highway Department is very near being ready to issue the first $30 million worth of highway reconstruction bonds.

The bond issue will go to the state courts for a friendly test suit to test the validity of the act, and then the sales will begin and contracts let for repair work on some of Georgia's most heavily traveled highways.

A Highway Department source said there also is a plan there to issue some $3 million to $4 million worth of Rural Roads Authority bonds for rural road construction work.

A revolving fund

The department apparently intends to make the Rural Roads Authority a revolving fund under which new bonds would be issued every time a portion of the old ones are paid off by tax authorities.

Vandiver opened his race for governor in 1958 with a battle in the Legislature against the issuance of $50 million worth of additional rural roads bonds proposed by then Gov. Marvin Griffin.

The Highway Department source told The Constitution, however, that Vandiver has not been consulted yet about the plans to issue the new rural roads bonds.

Schley County Rep. B. D. Pelham will offer a resolution Monday in the House to rescind the body's action of Friday in voting itself a $10 per day increase in expense allowances.

Pelham said Sunday night there was research being done on whether the `` quickie '' vote on the increase can be repealed outright or whether notice would have to first be given that reconsideration of the action would be sought.

While emphasizing that technical details were not fully worked out, Pelham said his resolution would seek to set aside the privilege resolution which the House voted through 87-31.

A similar resolution passed in the Senate by a vote of 29-5.

As of Sunday night, there was no word of a resolution being offered there to rescind the action.

Pelham pointed out that Georgia voters last November rejected a constitutional amendment to allow legislators to vote on pay raises for future Legislature sessions.

A veteran Jackson County legislator will ask the Georgia House Monday to back federal aid to education, something it has consistently opposed in the past.

Rep. Mac Barber of Commerce is asking the House in a privilege resolution to `` endorse increased federal support for public education, provided that such funds be received and expended '' as state funds.

Barber, who is in his 13th year as a legislator, said there `` are some members of our congressional delegation in Washington who would like to see it( the resolution) passed ''.

But he added that none of Georgia's congressmen specifically asked him to offer the resolution.

The resolution, which Barber tossed into the House hopper Friday, will be formally read Monday.

It says that `` in the event Congress does provide this increase in federal funds '', the State Board of Education should be directed to `` give priority '' to teacher pay raises.

Colquitt

-- After a long, hot controversy, Miller County has a new school superintendent, elected, as a policeman put it, in the `` coolest election I ever saw in this county ''.

The new school superintendent is Harry Davis, a veteran agriculture teacher, who defeated Felix Bush, a school principal and chairman of the Miller County Democratic Executive Committee.

Davis received 1,119 votes in Saturday's election, and Bush got 402.

Ordinary Carey Williams, armed with a pistol, stood by at the polls to insure order.

`` This was the coolest, calmest election I ever saw '', Colquitt Policeman Tom Williams said.

`` Being at the polls was just like being at church.

I didn't smell a drop of liquor, and we didn't have a bit of trouble ''.

The campaign leading to the election was not so quiet, however.

It was marked by controversy, anonymous midnight phone calls and veiled threats of violence.

The former county school superintendent, George P. Callan, shot himself to death March 18, four days after he resigned his post in a dispute with the county school board.

During the election campaign, both candidates, Davis and Bush, reportedly received anonymous telephone calls.

Ordinary Williams said he, too, was subjected to anonymous calls soon after he scheduled the election.

Many local citizens feared that there would be irregularities at the polls, and Williams got himself a permit to carry a gun and promised an orderly election.

Sheriff Felix Tabb said the ordinary apparently made good his promise.

`` Everything went real smooth '', the sheriff said.

`` There wasn't a bit of trouble ''.

Austin, Texas

-- Committee approval of Gov. Price Daniel's `` abandoned property '' act seemed certain Thursday despite the adamant protests of Texas bankers.

Daniel personally led the fight for the measure, which he had watered down considerably since its rejection by two previous Legislatures, in a public hearing before the House Committee on Revenue and Taxation.

Under committee rules, it went automatically to a subcommittee for one week.

But questions with which committee members taunted bankers appearing as witnesses left little doubt that they will recommend passage of it.

Daniel termed `` extremely conservative '' his estimate that it would produce 17 million dollars to help erase an anticipated deficit of 63 million dollars at the end of the current fiscal year next Aug. 31.

He told the committee the measure would merely provide means of enforcing the escheat law which has been on the books `` since Texas was a republic ''.

It permits the state to take over bank accounts, stocks and other personal property of persons missing for seven years or more.

The bill, which Daniel said he drafted personally, would force banks, insurance firms, pipeline companies and other corporations to report such property to the state treasurer.

The escheat law cannot be enforced now because it is almost impossible to locate such property, Daniel declared.

Dewey Lawrence, a Tyler lawyer representing the Texas Bankers Association, sounded the opposition keynote when he said it would force banks to violate their contractual obligations with depositors and undermine the confidence of bank customers.

`` If you destroy confidence in banks, you do something to the economy '', he said.

`` You take out of circulation many millions of dollars ''.

Rep. Charles E. Hughes of Sherman, sponsor of the bill, said a failure to enact it would amount `` to making a gift out of the taxpayers' pockets to banks, insurance and pipeline companies ''.

His contention was denied by several bankers, including Scott Hudson of Sherman, Gaynor B. Jones of Houston, J. B. Brady of Harlingen and Howard Cox of Austin.

Cox argued that the bill is `` probably unconstitutional '' since, he said, it would impair contracts.

He also complained that not enough notice was given on the hearing, since the bill was introduced only last Monday.

Austin, Texas

-- Senators unanimously approved Thursday the bill of Sen. George Parkhouse of Dallas authorizing establishment of day schools for the deaf in Dallas and the four other largest counties.

The bill is designed to provide special schooling for more deaf students in the scholastic age at a reduced cost to the state.

There was no debate as the Senate passed the bill on to the House.

It would authorize the Texas Education Agency to establish county-wide day schools for the deaf in counties of 300,000 or more population, require deaf children between 6 and 13 years of age to attend the day schools, permitting older ones to attend the residential Texas School for the Deaf here.

Operating budget for the day schools in the five counties of Dallas, Harris, Bexar, Tarrant and El Paso would be $451,500, which would be a savings of $157,460 yearly after the first year's capital outlay of $88,000 was absorbed, Parkhouse told the Senate.

The TEA estimated there would be 182 scholastics to attend the day school in Dallas County, saving them from coming to Austin to live in the state deaf school.

Dallas may get to hear a debate on horse race parimutuels soon between Reps. V. E.( Red) Berry and Joe Ratcliff.

While details are still to be worked out, Ratcliff said he expects to tell home folks in Dallas why he thinks Berry's proposed constitutional amendment should be rejected.

`` We're getting more' pro' letters than' con' on horse race betting '', said Ratcliff.

`` But I believe if people were better informed on this question, most of them would oppose it also.

I'm willing to stake my political career on it ''.

Rep. Berry, an ex-gambler from San Antonio, got elected on his advocacy of betting on the ponies.

A House committee which heard his local option proposal is expected to give it a favorable report, although the resolution faces hard sledding later.

The house passed finally, and sent to the Senate, a bill extending the State Health Department's authority to give planning assistance to cities.

The senate quickly whipped through its meager fare of House bills approved by committees, passing the three on the calendar.

One validated acts of school districts.

Another enlarged authority of the Beaumont Navigation District.

The third amended the enabling act for creation of the Lamar county Hospital District, for which a special constitutional amendment previously was adopted.

Without dissent, senators passed a bill by Sen. A. R. Schwartz of Galveston authorizing establishment in the future of a school for the mentally retarded in the Gulf Coast district.

Money for its construction will be sought later on but in the meantime the State Hospital board can accept gifts and donations of a site.

Two tax revision bills were passed.

One, by Sen. Louis Crump of San Saba, would aid more than 17,000 retailers who pay a group of miscellaneous excise taxes by eliminating the requirement that each return be notarized.

Instead, retailers would sign a certificate of correctness, violation of which would carry a penalty of one to five years in prison, plus a $1,000 fine.

It was one of a series of recommendations by the Texas Research League.

The other bill, by Sen. A. M. Aikin Jr. of Paris, would relieve real estate brokers, who pay their own annual licensing fee, from the $12 annual occupation license on brokers in such as stocks and bonds.

Natural gas public utility companies would be given the right of eminent domain, under a bill by Sen. Frank Owen 3, of El Paso, to acquire sites for underground storage reservoirs for gas.

Marshall Formby of Plainview, former chairman of the Texas Highway Commission, suggested a plan to fill by appointment future vacancies in the Legislature and Congress, eliminating the need for costly special elections.

Under Formby's plan, an appointee would be selected by a board composed of the governor, lieutenant governor, speaker of the House, attorney general and chief justice of the Texas Supreme Court.

Austin, Texas

-- State representatives decided Thursday against taking a poll on what kind of taxes Texans would prefer to pay.

An adverse vote of 81 to 65 kept in the State Affairs Committee a bill which would order the referendum on the April 4 ballot, when Texas votes on a U.S. senator.

Rep. Wesley Roberts of Seminole, sponsor of the poll idea, said that further delay in the committee can kill the bill.

The West Texan reported that he had finally gotten Chairman Bill Hollowell of the committee to set it for public hearing on Feb. 22.

The proposal would have to receive final legislative approval, by two-thirds majorities, before March 1 to be printed on the April 4 ballot, Roberts said.

Opponents generally argued that the ballot couldn't give enough information about tax proposals for the voters to make an intelligent choice.

All Dallas members voted with Roberts, except Rep. Bill Jones, who was absent.

Austin, Texas

-- Paradise lost to the alleged water needs of Texas' big cities Thursday.

Rep. James Cotten of Weatherford insisted that a water development bill passed by the Texas House of Representatives was an effort by big cities like Dallas and Fort Worth to cover up places like Paradise, a Wise County hamlet of 250 people.

When the shouting ended, the bill passed, 114 to 4, sending it to the Senate, where a similar proposal is being sponsored by Sen. George Parkhouse of Dallas.

Most of the fire was directed by Cotten against Dallas and Sen. Parkhouse.

The bill would increase from $5,000,000 to $15,000,000 the maximum loan the state could make to a local water project.

Cotten construed this as a veiled effort by Parkhouse to help Dallas and other large cities get money which Cotten felt could better be spent providing water for rural Texas.

Statements by other legislators that Dallas is paying for all its water program by local bonds, and that less populous places would benefit most by the pending bill, did not sway Cotten's attack.

The bill's defenders were mostly small-town legislators like J. W. Buchanan of Dumas, Eligio( Kika) De La Garza of Mission, Sam F. Collins of Newton and Joe Chapman of Sulphur Springs.

`` This is a poor boy's bill '', said Chapman.

`` Dallas and Fort Worth can vote bonds.

This would help the little peanut districts ''.

Austin, Texas

-- A Houston teacher, now serving in the Legislature, proposed Thursday a law reducing the time spent learning `` educational methods ''.

Rep. Henry C. Grover, who teaches history in the Houston public schools, would reduce from 24 to 12 semester hours the so-called `` teaching methods '' courses required to obtain a junior or senior high school teaching certificate.

A normal year's work in college is 30 semester hours.

Grover also would require junior-senior high teachers to have at least 24 semester hours credit in the subject they are teaching.

The remainder of the 4-year college requirement would be in general subjects.

`` A person with a master's degree in physics, chemistry, math or English, yet who has not taken Education courses, is not permitted to teach in the public schools '', said Grover.

College teachers in Texas are not required to have the Education courses.

Fifty-three of the 150 representatives immediately joined Grover as co-signers of the proposal.

Paris, Texas( sp.)

-- The board of regents of Paris Junior College has named Dr. Clarence Charles Clark of Hays, Kan. as the school's new president.

Dr. Clark will succeed Dr. J. R. McLemore, who will retire at the close of the present school term.

Dr. Clark holds an earned Doctor of Education degree from the University of Oklahoma.

He also received a Master of Science degree from Texas A& I College and a Bachelor of Science degree from Southwestern State College, Weatherford, Okla..

In addition, Dr. Clark has studied at Rhode Island State College and Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

During his college career, Dr. Clark was captain of his basketball team and was a football letterman.

Dr. Clark has served as teacher and principal in Oklahoma high schools, as teacher and athletic director at Raymondville, Texas, High School, as an instructor at the University of Oklahoma, and as an associate professor of education at Fort Hays, Kan., State College.

He has served as a border patrolman and was in the Signal Corps of the U.S. Army.

Denton, Texas( sp.)

-- Principals of the 13 schools in the Denton Independent School District have been re-elected for the 1961-62 session upon the recommendation of Supt. Chester O. Strickland.

State and federal legislation against racial discrimination in employment was called for yesterday in a report of a `` blue ribbon '' citizens committee on the aid to dependent children program.

The report, culminating a year long study of the ADC program in Cook county by a New York City welfare consulting firm, listed 10 long range recommendations designed to reduce the soaring ADC case load.

The report called racial discrimination in employment `` one of the most serious causes of family breakdown, desertion, and ADC dependency ''.

`` Must solve problem ''

The monthly cost of ADC to more than 100,000 recipients in the county is 4.4 million dollars, said C. Virgil Martin, president of Carson Pirie Scott& Co., committee chairman.

`` We must solve the problems which have forced these people to depend upon ADC for subsistence '', Martin said.

The volume of ADC cases will decrease, Martin reported, when the community is able to deal effectively with two problems: Relatively limited skills and discrimination in employment because of color.

These, he said, are `` two of the principal underlying causes for family breakups leading to ADC ''.

Calls for extension

Other recommendations made by the committee are:

Extension of the ADC program to all children in need living with any relatives, including both parents, as a means of preserving family unity.

Research projects as soon as possible on the causes and prevention of dependency and illegitimacy.

Several defendants in the Summerdale police burglary trial made statements indicating their guilt at the time of their arrest, Judge James B. Parsons was told in Criminal court yesterday.

The disclosure by Charles Bellows, chief defense counsel, startled observers and was viewed as the prelude to a quarrel between the six attorneys representing the eight former policemen now on trial.

Bellows made the disclosure when he asked Judge Parsons to grant his client, Alan Clements, 30, a separate trial.

Bellows made the request while the all-woman jury was out of the courtroom.

Fears prejudicial aspects

`` The statements may be highly prejudicial to my client '', Bellows told the court.

`` Some of the defendants strongly indicated they knew they were receiving stolen property.

It is impossible to get a fair trial when some of the defendants made statements involving themselves and others ''.

Judge Parsons leaned over the bench and inquired, `` You mean some of the defendants made statements admitting this ''??

`` Yes, your honor '', replied Bellows.

`` What this amounts to, if true, is that there will be a free-for-all fight in this case.

There is a conflict among the defendants ''.

Washington, July 24

-- President Kennedy today pushed aside other White House business to devote all his time and attention to working on the Berlin crisis address he will deliver tomorrow night to the American people over nationwide television and radio.

The President spent much of the week-end at his summer home on Cape Cod writing the first drafts of portions of the address with the help of White House aids in Washington with whom he talked by telephone.

Shortly after the Chief Executive returned to Washington in midmorning from Hyannis Port, Mass., a White House spokesman said the address text still had `` quite a way to go '' toward completion.

Decisions are made

Asked to elaborate, Pierre Salinger, White House press secretary, replied, `` I would say it's got to go thru several more drafts ''.

Salinger said the work President Kennedy, advisers, and members of his staff were doing on the address involved composition and wording, rather than last minute decisions on administration plans to meet the latest Berlin crisis precipitated by Russia's demands and proposals for the city.

The last 10 cases in the investigation of the Nov. 8 election were dismissed yesterday by Acting Judge John M. Karns, who charged that the prosecution obtained evidence `` by unfair and fundamentally illegal means ''.

Karns said that the cases involved a matter `` of even greater significance than the guilt or innocence '' of the 50 persons.

He said evidence was obtained `` in violation of the legal rights of citizens ''.

Karns' ruling pertained to eight of the 10 cases.

In the two other cases he ruled that the state had been `` unable to make a case ''.

Contempt proceedings originally had been brought against 677 persons in 133 precincts by Morris J. Wexler, special prosecutor.

Issue jury subpoenas

Wexler admitted in earlier court hearings that he issued grand jury subpenas to about 200 persons involved in the election investigation, questioned the individuals in the Criminal courts building, but did not take them before the grand jury.

Mayer Goldberg, attorney for election judges in the 58th precinct of the 23d ward, argued this procedure constituted intimidation.

Wexler has denied repeatedly that coercion was used in questioning.

Karns said it was a `` wrongful act '' for Wexler to take statements `` privately and outside of the grand jury room ''.

He said this constituted a `` very serious misuse '' of the Criminal court processes.

`` Actually, the abuse of the process may have constituted a contempt of the Criminal court of Cook county, altho vindication of the authority of that court is not the function of this court '', said Karns, who is a City judge in East St. Louis sitting in Cook County court.

Faced seven cases

Karns had been scheduled this week to hear seven cases involving 35 persons.

Wexler had charged the precinct judges in these cases with `` complementary '' miscount of the vote, in which votes would be taken from one candidate and given to another.

The cases involved judges in the 33d, 24th, and 42d precincts of the 31st ward, the 21st and 28th precincts of the 29th ward, the 18th precinct of the 4th ward, and the 9th precinct of the 23d ward.

The case of the judges in the 58th precinct of the 23d ward had been heard previously and taken under advisement by Karns.

Two other cases also were under advisement.

Claims precedent lacking

After reading his statement discharging the 23d ward case, Karns told Wexler that if the seven cases scheduled for trial also involved persons who had been subpenaed, he would dismiss them.

Washington, Feb. 9

-- President Kennedy today proposed a mammoth new medical care program whereby social security taxes on 70 million American workers would be raised to pay the hospital and some other medical bills of 14.2 million Americans over 65 who are covered by social security or railroad retirement programs.

The President, in a special message to Congress, tied in with his aged care plan requests for large federal grants to finance medical and dental scholarships, build 20 new medical and 20 new dental schools, and expand child health care and general medical research.

The aged care plan, similar to one the President sponsored last year as a senator, a fight on Capitol hill.

It was defeated in Congress last year.

Cost up to $37 a year

It would be financed by boosting the social security payroll tax by as much as $37 a year for each of the workers now paying such taxes.

The social security payroll tax is now 6 per cent -- 3 per cent on each worker and employer -- on the first $4,800 of pay per year.

The Kennedy plan alone would boost the base to $5,000 a year and the payroll tax to 6.5 per cent -- 3.25 per cent each.

Similar payroll tax boosts would be imposed on those under the railroad retirement system.

The payroll tax would actually rise to 7.5 per cent starting Jan. 1, 1963, if the plan is approved, because the levy is already scheduled to go up by 1 per cent on that date to pay for other social security costs.

Outlays would increase

Officials estimated the annual tax boost for the medical plan would amount to 1.5 billion dollars and that medical benefits paid out would run 1 billion or more in the first year, 1963.

Both figures would go higher in later years.

Other parts of the Kennedy health plan would entail federal grants of 750 million to 1 billion dollars over the next 10 years.

These would be paid for out of general, not payroll, taxes.

Nursing home care

The aged care plan carries these benefits for persons over 65 who are under the social security and railroad retirement systems: 1

Full payment of hospital bills for stays up to 90 days for each illness, except that the patient would pay $10 a day of the cost for the first nine days.

2

Full payment of nursing home bills for up to 180 days following discharge from a hospital.

A patient could receive up to 300 days paid-for nursing home care under a `` unit formula '' allowing more of such care for those who use none or only part of the hospital-care credit.

3

Hospital outpatient clinic diagnostic service for all costs in excess of $20 a patient.

4

Community visiting nurse services at home for up to 240 days an illness.

The President noted that Congress last year passed a law providing grants to states to help pay medical bills of the needy aged.

Calls proposal modest

He said his plan is designed to `` meet the needs of those millions who have no wish to receive care at the taxpayers' expense, but who are nevertheless staggered by the drain on their savings -- or those of their children -- caused by an extended hospital stay ''.

`` This is a very modest proposal cut to meet absolutely essential needs '', he said, `` and with sufficient' deductible' requirements to discourage any malingering or unnecessary overcrowding of our hospitals.

`` This is not a program of socialized medicine.

It is a program of prepayment of health costs with absolute freedom of choice guaranteed.

Every person will choose his own doctor and hospital ''.

Wouldn't pay doctors

The plan does not cover doctor bills.

They would still be paid by the patient.

Apart from the aged care plan the President's most ambitious and costly proposals were for federal scholarships, and grants to build or enlarge medical and dental schools.

The President said the nation's 92 medical and 47 dental schools cannot now handle the student load needed to meet the rising need for health care.

Moreover, he said, many qualified young people are not going into medicine and dentistry because they can't afford the schooling costs.

Contributions to schools

The scholarship plan would provide federal contributions to each medical and dental school equal to $1,500 a year for one-fourth of the first year students.

The schools could use the money to pay 4-year scholarships, based on need, of up to $2,000 a year per student.

In addition, the government would pay a $1,000 `` cost of education '' grant to the schools for each $1,500 in scholarship grants.

Officials estimated the combined programs would cost 5.1 million dollars the first year and would go up to 21 millions by 1966.

The President recommended federal `` matching grants '' totaling 700 million dollars in 10 years for constructing new medical and dental schools or enlarging the capacity of existing ones.

More for nursing homes

In the area of `` community health services '', the President called for doubling the present 10 million dollar a year federal grants for nursing home construction.

He asked for another 10 million dollar `` initial '' appropriation for `` stimulatory grants '' to states to improve nursing homes.

He further proposed grants of an unspecified sum for experimental hospitals.

In the child health field, the President said he will recommend later an increase in funds for programs under the children's bureau.

He also asked Congress to approve establishment of a national child health institute.

Asks research funds

The President said he will ask Congress to increase grants to states for vocational rehabilitation.

He did not say by how much.

For medical research he asked a 20 million dollar a year increase, from 30 to 50 millions, in matching grants for building research facilities.

The President said he will also propose increasing, by an unspecified amount, the 540 million dollars in the 1961-62 budget for direct government research in medicine.

The President said his proposals combine the `` indispensable elements in a sound health program -- people, knowledge, services, facilities, and the means to pay for them ''.

Reaction as expected

Congressional reaction to the message was along expected lines.

Legislators who last year opposed placing aged-care under the social security system criticized the President's plan.

Those who backed a similar plan last year hailed the message.

Senate Republican Leader Dirksen( Ill.) and House Republican Leader Charles Halleck( Ind.) said the message did not persuade them to change their opposition to compulsory medical insurance.

Halleck said the voluntary care plan enacted last year should be given a fair trial first.

House Speaker Sam Rayburn( D., Tex.) called the Kennedy program `` a mighty fine thing '', but made no prediction on its fate in the House.

Washington, Feb. 9

-- Acting hastily under White House pressure, the Senate tonight confirmed Robert C. Weaver as the nation's federal housing chief.

Only 11 senators were on the floor and there was no record vote.

A number of scattered `` ayes '' and `` noes '' was heard.

Customary Senate rules were ignored in order to speed approval of the Negro leader as administrator of the housing and home finance agency.

In the last eight years, all Presidential appointments, including those of cabinet rank, have been denied immediate action because of a Senate rule requiring at least a 24 hour delay after they are reported to the floor.

Enforce by demand

The rule was enforced by demand of Sen. Wayne Morse( D., Ore.) in connection with President Eisenhower's cabinet selections in 1953 and President Kennedy's in 1961.

Oslo

The most positive element to emerge from the Oslo meeting of North Atlantic Treaty Organization Foreign Ministers has been the freer, franker, and wider discussions, animated by much better mutual understanding than in past meetings.

This has been a working session of an organization that, by its very nature, can only proceed along its route step by step and without dramatic changes.

In Oslo, the ministers have met in a climate of candor, and made a genuine attempt to get information and understanding one another's problems.

This atmosphere of understanding has been particularly noticeable where relations are concerned between the `` colonialist '' powers and those who have never, or not for a long time, had such problems.

The nightmare of a clash between those in trouble in Africa, exacerbated by the difficulties, changes, and tragedies facing them, and other allies who intellectually and emotionally disapprove of the circumstances that have brought these troubles about, has been conspicuous by its absence.

Explosion avoided

In the case of Portugal, which a few weeks ago was rumored ready to walk out of the NATO Council should critics of its Angola policy prove harsh, there has been a noticeable relaxation of tension.

The general, remarkably courteous, explanation has left basic positions unchanged, but there has been no explosion in the council.

There should even be no more bitter surprises in the UN General Assembly as to NATO members' votes, since a new ad hoc NATO committee has been set up so that in the future such topics as Angola will be discussed in advance.

Canada alone has been somewhat out of step with the Oslo attempt to get all the allied cars back on the track behind the NATO locomotive.

Even Norway, despite daily but limited manifestations against atomic arms in the heart of this northernmost capital of the alliance, is today closer to the NATO line.

On the negative side of the balance sheet must be set some disappointment that the United States leadership has not been as much in evidence as hoped for.

One diplomat described the tenor of Secretary of State Dean Rusk's speeches as `` inconclusive ''.

But he hastened to add that, if United States policies were not always clear, despite Mr. Rusk's analysis of the various global danger points and setbacks for the West, this may merely mean the new administration has not yet firmly fixed its policy.

Exploratory mood

A certain vagueness may also be caused by tactical appreciation of the fact that the present council meeting is a semipublic affair, with no fewer than six Soviet correspondents accredited.

The impression has nevertheless been given during these three days, despite Mr. Rusk's personal popularity, that the United States delegation came to Oslo in a somewhat tentative and exploratory frame of mind, more ready to listen and learn than to enunciate firm policy on a global scale with detailed application to individual danger spots.

The Secretary of State himself, in his first speech, gave some idea of the tremendous march of events inside and outside the United States that has preoccupied the new administration in the past four months.

But where the core of NATO is concerned, the Secretary of State has not only reiterated the United States' profound attachment to the alliance, `` cornerstone '' of its foreign policy, but has announced that five nuclear submarines will eventually be at NATO's disposal in European waters.

The Secretary of State has also solemnly repeated a warning to the Soviet Union that the United States will not stand for another setback in Berlin, an affirmation once again taken up by the council as a whole.

Conflict surveyed

The secretary's greatest achievement is perhaps the rekindling of NATO realization that East-West friction, wherever it take place around the globe, is in essence the general conflict between two entirely different societies, and must be treated as such without regard to geographical distance or lack of apparent connection.

The annual spring meeting has given an impetus in three main directions: more, deeper, and more timely political consultation within the alliance, the use of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development( when ratified) as a method of coordinating aid to the underdeveloped countries, and the need for strengthening conventional forces as well as the maintenance of the nuclear deterrent.

This increase in the `` threshold '', as the conventional forces strengthening is called, will prove one of the alliance's most difficult problems in the months to come.

Each ally will have to carry out obligations long since laid down, but never completely fulfilled.

Washington

The Kennedy administration moves haltingly toward a Geneva conference on Laos just as serious debate over its foreign policy erupts for the first time.

There is little optimism here that the Communists will be any more docile at the conference table than they were in military actions on the ground in Laos.

The United States, State Department officials explain, now is mainly interested in setting up an international inspection system which will prevent Laos from being used as a base for Communist attacks on neighboring Thailand and South Viet Nam.

They count on the aid of the neutral countries attending the Geneva conference to achieve this.

The United States hopes that any future Lao Cabinet would not become Communist dominated.

But it is apparent that no acceptable formula has been found to prevent such a possibility.

Policies modified

The inclination here is to accept a de facto cease-fire in Laos, rather than continue to insist on a verification of the cease-fire by the international control commission before participating in the Geneva conference.

This is another of the modifications of policy on Laos that the Kennedy administration has felt compelled to make.

It excuses these actions as being the chain reaction to basic errors made in the previous administration.

Its spokesmen insist that there has not been time enough to institute reforms in military and economic aid policies in the critical areas.

But with the months moving on -- and the immediate confrontations with the Communists showing no gain for the free world -- the question arises:

How effective have Kennedy administration first foreign policy decisions been in dealing with Communist aggression??

Former Vice-President Richard M. Nixon in Detroit called for a firmer and tougher policy toward the Soviet Union.

He was critical of what he feels is President Kennedy's tendency to be too conciliatory.

GOP restrained

It does not take a Gallup poll to find out that most Republicans in Congress feel this understates the situation as Republicans see it.

They can hardly restrain themselves from raising the question of whether Republicans, if they had been in power, would have made `` amateurish and monumental blunders '' in Cuba.

One Republican senator told this correspondent that he was constantly being asked why he didn't attack the Kennedy administration on this score.

His reply, he said, was that he agreed to the need for unity in the country now.

But he further said that it was better politics to let others question the wisdom of administration policies first.

The Republicans some weeks ago served notice through Senator Thruston B. Morton( R) of Kentucky, chairman of the Republican National Committee, that the Kennedy administration would be held responsible if the outcome in Laos was a coalition government susceptible of Communist domination.

Kennedy administration policies also have been assailed now from another direction by 70 Harvard, Boston University, Brandeis, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology educators.

Detente urged

This group pleads with the administration to `` give no further support for the invasion of Cuba by exile groups ''.

It recommends that the United States `` seek instead to detach the Castro regime from the Communist bloc by working for a diplomatic detente and a resumption of trade relations;;

and concentrate its constructive efforts on eliminating in other parts of Latin America the social conditions on which totalitarian nationalism feeds ''.

Mr. Nixon, for his part, would oppose intervention in Cuba without specific provocation.

But he did recommend that President Kennedy state clearly that if Communist countries shipped any further arms to Cuba that it would not be tolerated.

Until the Cuban fiasco and the Communist military victories in Laos, almost any observer would have said that President Kennedy had blended a program that respected, generally, the opinions voiced both by Mr. Nixon and the professors.

Aid plans revamped

Very early in his administration he informed the Kremlin through diplomatic channels, a high official source disclosed, that the new administration would react even tougher than the Eisenhower administration would during the formative period of the administration.

Strenuous efforts were made to remove pin pricking from administration statements.

Policies on nuclear test ban negotiations were reviewed and changed.

But thus far there has been no response in kind.

Foreign aid programs were revamped to give greater emphasis to economic aid and to encourage political reform in recipient nations.

In Laos, the administration looked at the Eisenhower administration efforts to show determination by sailing a naval fleet into Southeast Asian waters as a useless gesture.

Again and again it asked the Communists to `` freeze '' the military situation in Laos.

But the Communists aided the Pathet Lao at an even faster rate.

And after several correspondents went into Pathet Lao territory and exposed the huge build-up, administration spokesmen acclaimed them for performing a `` great service '' and laid the matter before the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.

SEATO was steamed up and prepared contingency plans for coping with the military losses in Laos.

But the Communists never gave sufficient provocation at any one time for the United States to want to risk a limited or an all-out war over Laos.

( Some SEATO nations disagreed, however.

)

There was the further complication that the administration had very early concluded that Laos was ill suited to be an ally, unlike its more determined neighbors, Thailand and South Viet Nam.

The administration declared itself in favor of a neutralized Laos.

The pro-Western government, which the United States had helped in a revolt against the Souvanna Phouma `` neutralist '' government, never did appear to spark much fighting spirit in the Royal Lao Army.

There certainly was not any more energy displayed after it was clear the United States would not back the pro-Western government to the hilt.

If the administration ever had any ideas that it could find an acceptable alternative to Prince Souvanna Phouma, whom it felt was too trusting of Communists, it gradually had to relinquish them.

One factor was the statement of Senator J. W. Fulbright( D) of Arkansas, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

He declared on March 25 that the United States had erred a year and a half ago by `` encouraging the removal '' of Prince Souvanna.

Washington

The White House is taking extraordinary steps to check the rapid growth of juvenile delinquency in the United States.

The President is deeply concerned over this problem and its effect upon the `` vitality of the nation ''.

In an important assertion of national leadership in this field, he has issued an executive order establishing the President's committee on Juvenile Delinquency and Crime, to be supported and assisted by a Citizens Advisory Council of recognized authorities on juvenile problems.

The President asks the support and cooperation of Congress in his efforts through the enactment of legislation to provide federal grants to states for specified efforts in combating this disturbing crime trend.

Offenses multiply

The President has also called upon the Attorney General, the Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, and the Secretary of Labor to coordinate their efforts `` in the development of a program of federal leadership to assist states and local communities in their efforts to cope with the problem.

Simultaneously the President announced Thursday the appointment of David L. Hackett, a special assistant to the Attorney General, as executive director of the new Committee on Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Crime.

His sense of urgency in this matter stems from the fact that court cases and juvenile arrests have more than doubled since 1948, each year showing an increase in offenders.

Among arrests reported by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in 1959, about half for burglary and larceny involved persons under 18 years of age.

East Providence should organize its civil defense setup and begin by appointing a full-time director, Raymond H. Hawksley, the present city CD head, believes.

Mr. Hawksley said yesterday he would be willing to go before the city council `` or anyone else locally '' to outline his proposal at the earliest possible time.

East Providence now has no civil defense program.

Mr. Hawksley, the state's general treasurer, has been a part-time CD director in the city for the last nine years.

He is not interested in being named a full-time director.

Noting that President Kennedy has handed the Defense Department the major responsibility for the nation's civil defense program, Mr. Hawksley said the federal government would pay half the salary of a full-time local director.

He expressed the opinion the city could hire a CD director for about $3,500 a year and would only have to put up half that amount on a matching fund basis to defray the salary costs.

Mr. Hawksley said he believed there are a number of qualified city residents who would be willing to take the full-time CD job.

One of these men is former Fire Chief John A. Laughlin, he said.

Along with a director, the city should provide a CD headquarters so that pertinent information about the local organization would be centralized.

Mr. Hawksley said.

One advantage that would come to the city in having a full-time director, he said, is that East Providence would become eligible to apply to the federal government for financial aid in purchasing equipment needed for a sound civil defense program.

Matching funds also can be obtained for procurement of such items as radios, sirens and rescue trucks, he said.

Mr. Hawksley believes that East Providence could use two more rescue trucks, similar to the CD vehicle obtained several years ago and now detailed to the Central Fire Station.

He would assign one of the rescue trucks to the Riverside section of the city and the other to the Rumford area.

Speaking of the present status of civil defense in the city, Mr. Hawksley said he would be willing to bet that not more than one person in a hundred would know what to do or where to go in the event of an enemy attack.

The Narragansett Race Track grounds is one assembly point, he said, and a drive-in theater in Seekonk would be another.

Riverside residents would go to the Seekonk assembly point.

Mr. Hawksley said he was not critical of city residents for not knowing what to do or where to assemble in case of an air attack.

Such vital information, he said, has to be made available to the public frequently and at regular intervals for residents to know.

If the city council fails to consider appointment of a full-time CD director, Mr. Hawksley said, then he plans to call a meeting early in September so that a civil defense organization will be developed locally.

One of the first things he would do, he said, would be to organize classes in first aid.

Other steps would be developed after information drifts down to the local level from the federal government.

Rhode Island is going to examine its Sunday sales law with possible revisions in mind.

Governor Notte said last night he plans to name a committee to make the study and come up with recommendations for possible changes in time for the next session of the General Assembly.

The governor's move into the so-called `` blue law '' controversy came in the form of a letter to Miss Mary R. Grant, deputy city clerk of Central Falls.

A copy was released to the press.

Mr. Notte was responding to a resolution adopted by the Central Falls City Council on July 10 and sent to the state house by Miss Grant.

The resolution urges the governor to have a complete study of the Sunday sales laws made with an eye to their revision at the next session of the legislature.

While the city council suggested that the Legislative Council might perform the review, Mr. Notte said that instead he will take up the matter with Atty. Gen. J. Joseph Nugent to get `` the benefit of his views ''.

He will then appoint the study committee with Mr. Nugent's cooperation, the governor said.

`` I would expect the proposed committee to hold public hearings '', Mr. Notte said, `` to obtain the views of the general public and religious, labor and special-interest groups affected by these laws ''.

The governor wrote Miss Grant that he has been concerned for some time `` with the continuous problem which confronts our local and state law enforcement officers as a result of the laws regulating Sunday sales ''.

The attorney general has advised local police that it is their duty to enforce the blue laws.

Should there be evidence they are shirking, he has said, the state police will step into the situation.

There has been more activity across the state line in Massachusetts than in Rhode Island in recent weeks toward enforcement of the Sunday sales laws.

The statutes, similar in both the Bay State and Rhode Island and dating back in some instances to colonial times, severely limit the types of merchandise that may be sold on the Sabbath.

The Central Falls City Council expressed concern especially that more foods be placed on the eligible list and that neighborhood grocery and variety stores be allowed to do business on Sunday.

The only day they `` have a chance to compete with large supermarkets is on Sunday '', the council's resolution said.

The small shops `` must be retained, for they provide essential service to the community '', according to the resolution, which added that they `` also are the source of livelihood for thousands of our neighbors ''.

It declares that Sunday sales licenses provide `` great revenue '' to the local government.

The council advised the governor that `` large supermarkets, factory outlets and department stores not be allowed to do business '' on Sunday.

They `` operate on a volume basis '', it was contended, `` and are not essential to provide the more limited but vital shopping needs of the community ''.

Liberals and conservatives in both parties -- Democratic and Republican -- should divorce themselves and form two independent parties, George H. Reama, nationally known labor-management expert, said here yesterday.

Mr. Reama told the Rotary Club of Providence at its luncheon at the Sheraton-Biltmore Hotel that about half of the people in the country want the `` welfare '' type of government and the other half want a free enterprise system.

He suggested that a regrouping of forces might allow the average voter a better pull at the right lever for him on election day.

He said he was `` confessing that I was a member of the Socialist Party in 1910 ''.

That, he added, was when he was `` a very young man, a machinist and toolmaker by trade.

`` That was before I studied law.

Some of my fellow workers were grooming me for an office in the Socialist Party.

The lawyer with whom I studied law steered me off the Socialist track.

He steered me to the right track -- the free enterprise track ''.

He said that when he was a Socialist in 1910, the party called for government operation of all utilities and the pooling of all resources.

He suggested that without the Socialist Party ever gaining a national victory, most of its original program has come to pass under both major parties.

Mr. Reama, who retired as vice president of the American Screw Co. in 1955 said, `` Both parties in the last election told us that we need a five per cent growth in the gross national product -- but neither told us how to achieve it ''.

He said he favors wage increases for workers -- `` but manufacturers are caught in a profit squeeze '' -- and raises should only come when the public is conditioned to higher prices, he added.

Indicating the way in which he has turned his back on his 1910 philosophy, Mr. Reama said: `` A Socialist is a person who believes in dividing everything he does not own ''.

Mr. Reama, far from really being retired, is engaged in industrial relations counseling.

A petition bearing the signatures of more than 1,700 Johnston taxpayers was presented to the town council last night as what is hoped will be the first step in obtaining a home rule charter for the town.

William A. Martinelli, chairman of the Citizens Group of Johnston, transferred the petitions from his left hand to his right hand after the council voted to accept them at the suggestion of Council President Raymond Fortin Sr..

The law which governs home rule charter petitions states that they must be referred to the chairman of the board of canvassers for verification of the signatures within 10 days and Mr. Martinelli happens to hold that post.

Mr. Martinelli explained that there should be more than enough signatures to assure the scheduling of a vote on the home rule charter and possible election of a nine member charter commission within 70 days.

He explained that by law the council must establish procedures for a vote on the issue within 60 days after the board of canvassers completes its work.

A difference of opinion arose between Mr. Martinelli and John P. Bourcier, town solicitor, over the exact manner in which the vote is handled.

Mr. Martinelli has, in recent weeks, been of the opinion that a special town meeting would be called for the vote, while Mr. Bourcier said that a special election might be called instead.

Mr. Bourcier said that he had consulted several Superior Court justices in the last week and received opinions favoring both procedures.

He assured Mr. Martinelli and the council that he would study the correct method and report back to the council as soon as possible.

Mr. Martinelli said yesterday that the Citizens Group of Johnston will meet again July 24 to plan further strategy in the charter movement.

He said that the group has no candidates for the charter commission in mind at present, but that it will undoubtedly endorse candidates when the time comes.

`` After inspiring this, I think we should certainly follow through on it '', he declared.

`` It has become our responsibility and I hope that the Citizens Group will spearhead the movement ''.

He said he would not be surprised if some of the more than 30 members of the group are interested in running on the required non-partisan ballot for posts on the charter commission.

`` Our most immediate goal is to increase public awareness of the movement '', he indicated, `` and to tell them what this will mean for the town ''.

He expects that if the present timetable is followed a vote will be scheduled during the last week in September.

Some opposition to the home rule movement started to be heard yesterday, with spokesmen for the town's insurgent Democratic leadership speaking out against the home rule charter in favor of the model municipal league charter.

Increasing opposition can be expected in coming weeks, it was indicated.

Misunderstanding of the real meaning of a home rule charter was cited as a factor which has caused the Citizens Group to obtain signatures under what were termed `` false pretenses ''.

Several signers affixed their names, it was learned, after being told that no tax increase would be possible without consent of the General Assembly and that a provision could be included in the charter to have the town take over the Johnston Sanitary District sewer system.

Action on a new ordinance permitting motorists who plead guilty to minor traffic offenses to pay fines at the local police station may be taken at Monday's special North Providence Town Council meeting.

Council president Frank SanAntonio said yesterday he may ask the council to formally request Town Solicitor Michael A. Abatuno to draft the ordinance.

At the last session of the General Assembly, the town was authorized to adopt such an ordinance as a means of making enforcement of minor offenses more effective.

Nothing has been done yet to take advantage of the enabling legislation.

At present all offenses must be taken to Sixth District Court for disposition.

Local police have hesitated to prosecute them because of the heavy court costs involved even for the simplest offense.

Plainfield

-- James P. Mitchell and Sen. Walter H. Jones R-Bergen, last night disagreed on the value of using as a campaign issue a remark by Richard J. Hughes, Democratic gubernatorial candidate, that the GOP is `` Campaigning on the carcass of Eisenhower Republicanism ''.

Mitchell was for using it, Jones against, and Sen. Wayne Dumont Jr. R-Warren did not mention it when the three Republican gubernatorial candidates spoke at staggered intervals before 100 persons at the Park Hotel.

The controversial remark was first made Sunday by Hughes at a Westfield Young Democratic Club cocktail party at the Scotch Plains Country Club.

It was greeted with a chorus of boos by 500 women in Trenton Monday at a forum of the State Federation of Women's Clubs.

Hughes said Monday, `` It is the apparent intention of the Republican Party to campaign on the carcass of what they call Eisenhower Republicanism, but the heart stopped beating and the lifeblood congealed after Eisenhower retired.

Now he's gone, the Republican Party is not going to be able to sell the tattered remains to the people of the state ''.

Sunday he had added, `` We can love Eisenhower the man, even if we considered him a mediocre president but there is nothing left of the Republican Party without his leadership ''.

Mitchell said the statement should become a major issue in the primary and the fall campaign.

`` How can a man with any degree of common decency charge this ''??

He asked.

The former secretary of labor said he was proud to be an Eisenhower Republican `` and proud to have absorbed his philosophy '' while working in his adminstration.

Mitchell said the closeness of the outcome in last fall's Presidential election did not mean that Eisenhower Republicanism was a dead issue.

Regrets attack

Jones said he regretted Hughes had made a personal attack on a past president.

`` He is wrong to inject Eisenhower into this campaign '', he said, `` because the primary is being waged on state issues and I will not be forced into re-arguing an old national campaign ''.

The audience last night did not respond with either applause or boos to mention of Hughes' remark.

Dumont spoke on the merit of having an open primary.

He then launched into what the issues should be in the campaign.

State aid to schools, the continuance of railroad passenger service, the proper uses of surplus funds of the Port of New York Authority, and making New Jersey attractive to new industry.

Decries joblessness

Mitchell decried the high rate of unemployment in the state and said the Meyner administration and the Republican-controlled State Senate `` Must share the blame for this ''.

Noting that Plainfield last year had lost the Mack Truck Co. plant, he said industry will not come into this state until there is tax reform.

`` But I am not in favor of a sales or state income tax at this time '', Mitchell said.

Jones, unhappy that the candidates were limited to eight minutes for a speech and no audience questions, saved his barbs for Mitchell.

He said Mitchell is against the centralization of government in Washington but looks to the Kennedy Administration for aid to meet New Jersey school and transportation crises.

`` He calls for help while saying he is against centralization, but you can't have it both ways '', Jones said.

The state is now faced with the immediate question of raising new taxes whether on utilities, real estate or motor vehicles, he said, `` and I challenge Mitchell to tell the people where he stands on the tax issue ''.

Defends Ike

Earlier, Mitchell said in a statement:

`` I think that all Americans will resent deeply the statements made about President Eisenhower by Richard J. Hughes.

His reference to' discredited carcass' or' tattered remains' of the president's leadership is an insult to the man who led our forces to victory in the greatest war in all history, to the man who was twice elected overwhelmingly by the American people as president of the United States, and who has been the symbol to the world of the peace-loving intentions of the free nations.

`` I find it hard to understand how anyone seeking a position in public life could demonstrate such poor judgment and bad taste.

`` Such a vicious statement can only have its origin in the desire of a new political candidate to try to make his name known by condemning a man of world stature.

It can only rebound to Mr. Hughes' discredit ''.

Sees Jones ahead

Sen. Charles W. Sandman, R-Cape May, said today Jones will run well ahead of his GOP opponents for the gubernatorial nomination.

Sandman, state campaign chairman for Jones, was addressing a meeting in the Military Park Hotel, Newark, of Essex County leaders and campaign managers for Jones.

Sandman told the gathering that reports from workers on a local level all over the state indicate that Jones will be chosen the Republican Party's nominee with the largest majority given a candidate in recent years.

Sandman said: `` The announcement that Sen. Clifford Case Aj, has decided to spend all his available time campaigning for Mr. Mitchell is a dead giveaway.

It is a desperate effort to prop up a sagging candidate who has proven he cannot answer any questions about New Jersey's problems.

`` We have witnessed in this campaign the effort to project Mr. Mitchell as the image of a unity candidate from Washington.

That failed.

`` We are now witnessing an effort to transfer to Mr. Mitchell some of the glow of Sen. Case's candidacy of last year.

That, too, will fail ''.

Sandman announced the appointment of Mrs. Harriet Copeland Greenfield of 330 Woodland Ave., Westfield, as state chairman of the Republican Women for Jones Committee.

Mrs. Greenfield is president of the Westfield Women's Republican Club and is a Westfield county committeewoman.

County Supervisor Weldon R. Sheets, who is a candidate for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination, today called for an end to paper ballots in those counties in the state which still use them.

The proposal, Sheets said, represents part of his program for election reforms necessary to make democracy in New Jersey more than a `` lip service word ''.

Sheets said that his proposed law would offer state financing aid for the purchase of voting machines, enabling counties to repay the loan over a 10-year period without interest or charge.

Sheets added that he would ask for exclusive use of voting machines in the state by January, 1964.

Although he pointed out that mandatory legislation impinging on home rule is basically distasteful, he added that the vital interest in election results transcended county lines.

The candidacy of Mayor James J. Sheeran of West Orange, for the Republican nomination for sheriff of Essex County, was supported today by Edward W. Roos, West Orange public safety commissioner.

Sheeran, a lawyer and former FBI man is running against the Republican organization's candidate, Freeholder William MacDonald, for the vacancy left by the resignation of Neil Duffy, now a member of the State Board of Tax Appeals.

`` My experience as public safety commissioner '', Roos said, `` has shown me that the office of sheriff is best filled by a man with law enforcement experience, and preferably one who is a lawyer.

Jim Sheeran fits that description ''.

Trenton

-- William J. Seidel, state fire warden in the Department of Conservation and Economic Development, has retired after 36 years of service.

A citation from Conservation Commissioner Salvatore A. Bontempo credits his supervision with a reduction in the number of forest fires in the state.

Seidel joined the department in 1925 as a division fire warden after graduation in 1921 from the University of Michigan with a degree in forestry and employment with private lumber companies.

In October 1944, he was appointed state warden and chief of the Forest Fire Section.

Under his supervision, the state fire-fighting agency developed such techniques as plowing of fire lines and established a fleet of tractor plows and tractor units for fire fighting.

He also expanded and modernized the radio system with a central control station.

He introduced regular briefing sessions for district fire wardens and first aid training for section wardens.

He is credited with setting up an annual co-operative fire prevention program in co-operation with the Red Cross and State Department of Education.

Boonton

-- Richard J. Hughes made his Morris County debut in his bid for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination here last night with a pledge `` to carry the issues to every corner of the state ''.

He promised nearly 200 Democratic county committee members at the meeting in the Puddingstone Inn: `` When I come back here after the November election you'll think,' You're my man -- you're the kind of governor we're glad we elected' ''.

He said, `` We Democrats must resolve our issues on the test of what is right and just, and not what is expedient at the time ''.

Attacks Republicans

In his only attack on the Republicans, Hughes said, `` The three Republican candidates for governor are tripping over their feet for popular slogans to win the primary.

But we'll have a liberal, well planned, forward looking, honest platform.

We'll not talk out of one side of our mouth in Morris County and out of the other side in Hudson.

`` We'll take the truth to the people, and the people will like the truth and elect their candidate and party in November ''.

He said, `` You can see signs of the Republicans' feeble attack on the Meyner administration.

But I shall campaign on the Meyner record to meet the needs of the years ahead ''.

He urged New Jersey to `` become a full partner in the courageous actions of President Kennedy ''.

He called for a greater attraction of industry and a stop to the piracy of industry by Southern states, and a strong fight against discrimination in business and industry.

`` We must keep the bloodstream of New Jersey clean '', the former Superior Court judge said.

`` To prevent hoodlums from infiltrating the state as they did in the Republican administration in the early 1940s ''.

Calling the Democrats the `` party that lives, breathes and thinks for the good of the people '', Hughes asked, `` a representative Democratic vote in the primary for a springboard toward victory in November ''.

Hughes supported Gov. Meyner's `` Green Acres '' plan for saving large tracts of open land from the onrush of urban development.

He said legislation for a $60 million bond issue to underwrite the program is expected to be introduced Monday.

Conservation plan

The plan will provide $45 million for purchase of open land by the state.

The other $15 million is to be alloted to municipalities on a matching fund basis.

Hughes said, `` This is not a plan to conquer space -- but to conserve it '', pointing out the state population has increased 125,000 each year since 1950.

He said `` Morris County is rapidly changing and unless steps are taken to preserve the green areas, there will be no land left to preserve ''.

Hughes would not comment on tax reforms or other issues in which the Republican candidates are involved.

He said no matter what stand he takes it would be misconstrued that he was sympathetic to one or the other of the Republicans.

`` After the primary '', he promised, `` I'll be explicit on where I stand to bring you a strong, dynamic administration.

I'm not afraid to tangle with the Republican nominee ''.

Trenton

-- Fifteen members of the Republican State Committee who are retiring -- voluntarily -- this year were honored yesterday by their colleagues.

The outgoing members, whose four-year terms will expire a week after the April 18 primary election, received carved wooden elephants, complete with ivory tusks, to remember the state committee by.

There may be other 1961 state committee retirements come April 18, but they will be leaving by choice of the Republican voters.

A special presentation was made to Mrs. Geraldine Thompson of Red Bank, who is stepping down after 35 years on the committee.

She also was the original GOP national committeewoman from New Jersey in the early 1920s following adoption of the women's suffrage amendment.

She served one four-year term on the national committee.

Resentment welled up yesterday among Democratic district leaders and some county leaders at reports that Mayor Wagner had decided to seek a third term with Paul R. Screvane and Abraham D. Beame as running mates.

At the same time reaction among anti-organization Democratic leaders and in the Liberal party to the Mayor's reported plan was generally favorable.

Some anti-organization Democrats saw in the program an opportunity to end the bitter internal fight within the Democratic party that has been going on for the last three years.

The resentment among Democratic organization leaders to the reported Wagner plan was directed particularly at the Mayor's efforts to name his own running mates without consulting the leaders.

Some viewed this attempt as evidence that Mr. Wagner regarded himself as bigger than the party.

Opposition reported

Some Democratic district and county leaders are reported trying to induce State Controller Arthur Levitt of Brooklyn to oppose Mr. Wagner for the Mayoral nomination in the Sept. 7 Democratic primary.

These contend there is a serious question as to whether Mr. Wagner has the confidence of the Democratic rank and file in the city.

Their view is that last-minute changes the Mayor is proposing to make in the Democratic ticket only emphasize the weakness of his performance as Mayor.

In an apparent effort to head off such a rival primary slate, Mr. Wagner talked by telephone yesterday with Representative Charles A. Buckley, the Bronx Democratic leader, and with Joseph T. Sharkey, the Brooklyn Democratic leader.

Mayor visits Buckley

As usual, he made no attempt to get in touch with Carmine G. De Sapio, the Manhattan leader.

He is publicly on record as believing Mr. De Sapio should be replaced for the good of the party.

Last night the Mayor visited Mr. Buckley at the Bronx leader's home for a discussion of the situation.

Apparently he believes Mr. Buckley holds the key to the Democratic organization's acceptance of his choices for running mates without a struggle.

In talks with Mr. Buckley last week in Washington, the Mayor apparently received the Bronx leader's assent to dropping Controller Lawrence E. Gerosa, who lives in the Bronx, from this year's ticket.

But Mr. Buckley seems to have assumed he would be given the right to pick Mr. Gerosa's successor.

Screvane and Beame hailed

The Mayor declined in two interviews with reporters yesterday to confirm or deny the reports that he had decided to run and wanted Mr. Screvane, who lives in Queens, to replace Abe Stark, the incumbent, as the candidate for President of the City Council and Mr. Beame, who lives in Brooklyn, to replace Mr. Gerosa as the candidate for Controller.

The Mayor spoke yesterday at the United Irish Counties Feis on the Hunter College Campus in the Bronx.

After his speech, reporters asked him about the report of his political intentions, published in yesterday's New York Times.

The Mayor said:

`` It didn't come from me.

But as I have said before, if I announce my candidacy, I will have something definite to say about running mates ''.

Boston, June 16

-- A wave of public resentment against corruption in government is rising in Massachusetts.

There is a tangible feeling in the air of revulsion toward politics.

The taxi driver taking the visitor from the airport remarks that politicians in the state are `` all the same ''.

`` It's' See Joe, see Jim' '', he says.

`` The hand is out ''.

A political scientist writes of the growth of `` alienated voters '', who `` believe that voting is useless because politicians or those who influence politicians are corrupt, selfish and beyond popular control.

These voters view the political process as a secret conspiracy, the object of which is to plunder them ''.

Corruption is hardly a recent development in the city and state that were widely identified as the locale of Edwin O'Connor's novel, `` The Last Hurrah ''.

But there are reasons for the current spotlight on the subject.

A succession of highly publicized scandals has aroused the public within the last year.

Graft in the construction of highways and other public works has brought on state and Federal investigations.

And the election of President Kennedy has attracted new attention to the ethical climate of his home state.

A reader of the Boston newspapers can hardly escape the impression that petty chicanery, or worse, is the norm in Massachusetts public life.

Day after day some new episode is reported.

The state Public Works Department is accused of having spent $8,555 to build a private beach for a state judge on his waterfront property.

An assistant attorney general is directed to investigate.

Washington, June 18

-- Congress starts another week tomorrow with sharply contrasting forecasts for the two chambers.

In the Senate, several bills are expected to pass without any major conflict or opposition.

In the House, the Southern-Republican coalition is expected to make another major stand in opposition to the Administration's housing bill, while more jockeying is expected in an attempt to advance the aid-to-education bill.

The housing bill is now in the House Rules Committee.

It is expected to be reported out Tuesday, but this is a little uncertain.

The panel's action depends on the return of Representative James W. Trimble, Democrat of Arkansas, who has been siding with Speaker Sam Rayburn's forces in the Rules Committee in moving bills to the floor.

Mr. Trimble has been in the hospital but is expected back Tuesday.

Leadership is hopeful

The housing bill is expected to encounter strong opposition by the coalition of Southern Democrats and conservative Republicans.

The Democratic leadership, however, hopes to pass it sometime this week.

The $6,100,000,000 measure, which was passed last Monday by the Senate, provides for forty-year mortgages at low down-payments for moderate-income families.

It also provides for funds to clear slums and help colleges build dormitories.

The education bill appears to be temporarily stalled in the Rules Committee, where two Northern Democratic members who usually vote with the Administration are balking because of the religious controversy.

They are James J. Delaney of Queens and Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. of Massachusetts.

Three groups to meet

What could rescue the bill would be some quick progress on a bill amending the National Defense Education Act of 1958.

This would provide for long-term Federal loans for construction of parochial and other private-school facilities for teaching science, languages and mathematics.

Mr. Delaney and Mr. O'Neill are not willing to vote on the public-school measure until the defense education bill clears the House Education and Labor Committee.

About half of all Peace Corps projects assigned to voluntary agencies will be carried out by religious groups, according to an official of the corps.

In the $40,000,000 budget that has been submitted for Congressional approval, $26,000,000 would be spent through universities and private voluntary agencies.

Twelve projects proposed by private groups are at the contract-negotiation stage, Gordon Boyce, director of relations with the voluntary agencies, said in a Washington interview.

Six of these were proposed by religious groups.

They will be for teaching, agriculture and community development in Southeast Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America.

Question raised

Interviews with several church leaders have disclosed that this development has raised the question whether the Peace Corps will be able to prevent confusion for church and state over methods, means and goals.

There are a number of ways this could happen, the churchmen pointed out, and here is an example:

Last month in Ghana an American missionary discovered when he came to pay his hotel bill that the usual rate had been doubled.

When he protested, the hotel owner said:

`` Why do you worry??

The U. S. Government is paying for it.

The U. S. Government pays for all its overseas workers ''.

Missionary explains

`` I don't work for the Government '', the American said.

`` I'm a missionary ''.

The hotel owner shrugged.

`` Same thing '', he said.

And then, some churchmen remarked, there is a more classical church-state problem:

Can religious agencies use Government funds and Peace Corps personnel in their projects and still preserve the constitutional requirement on separation of church and state??

R. Sargent Shriver Jr., director of the corps, is certain that they can.

No religious group, he declared in an interview, will receive Peace Corps funds unless it forswears all proselytizing on the project it proposes.

Moscow, June 18

-- At a gay party in the Kremlin for President Sukarno of Indonesia, Premier Khrushchev pulled out his pockets and said, beaming: `` Look, he took everything I had ''!!

Mr. Khrushchev was jesting in the expansive mood of the successful banker.

Indonesia is one of the twenty under-developed countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America that are receiving Soviet aid.

The Soviet Union and other members of the Communist bloc are rapidly expanding their economic, technical and military assistance to the uncommitted nations.

The Communist countries allocated more than $1,000,000,000 in economic aid alone last year, according to Western estimates.

This was the biggest annual outlay since the Communist program for the under-developed countries made its modest beginning in 1954.

In 1960 more than 6,000 Communist technicians were present in those countries.

United Nations, N. Y., June 18

-- A committee of experts has recommended that a country's population be considered in the distribution of professional posts at the United Nations.

This was disclosed today by a responsible source amid intensified efforts by the Soviet Union to gain a greater role in the staff and operation of the United Nations.

One effect of the proposal, which puts a premium on population instead of economic strength, as in the past, would be to take jobs from European nations and give more to such countries as India.

India is the most populous United Nations member with more than 400,000,000 inhabitants.

The new formula for filling staff positions in the Secretariat is one of a number of recommendations made by a panel of eight in a long and detailed report.

The report was completed after nearly eighteen months of work on the question of the organization of the United Nations.

Formula is due this week

The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is expected to receive the report this week.

The jobs formula is understood to follow these lines:

Each of the organization's ninety-nine members would get two professional posts, such as political affairs officer, a department head or an economist, to start.

Each member would get one post for each 10,000,000 people in its population up to 150,000,000 people or a maximum of fifteen posts.

Each member with a population above 150,000,000 would get one additional post for each additional 30,000,000 people up to an unspecified cut-off point.

Geneva, June 18

-- The three leaders of Laos agreed today to begin negotiations tomorrow on forming a coalition government that would unite the war-ridden kingdom.

The decision was made in Zurich by Prince Boun Oum, Premier of the pro-Western royal Government;;

Prince Souvanna Phouma, leader of the nation's neutralists and recognized as Premier by the Communist bloc, and Prince Souphanouvong, head of the pro-Communist Pathet Lao forces.

The latter two are half-brothers.

Their joint statement was welcomed by the Western delegations who will attend tomorrow the nineteenth plenary session of the fourteen-nation conference on the future of Laos.

An agreement among the Princes on a coalition government would ease their task, diplomats conceded.

But no one was overly optimistic.

Tactics studied in Geneva

W. Averell Harriman of the United States, Malcolm MacDonald of Britain, Maurice Couve De Murville, France's Foreign Minister, and Howard C. Green, Canada's Minister of External Affairs, concluded, meanwhile, a round of consultations here on future tactics in the conference.

The pace of the talks has slowed with each passing week.

Princess Moune, Prince Souvanna Phouma's young daughter, read the Princes' statement.

They had a two-hour luncheon together in `` an atmosphere of cordial understanding and relaxation '', she said.

The three Laotians agreed upon a six-point agenda for their talks, which are to last three days.

The Princess said it was too early to say what would be decided if no agreement was reached after three days.

To deal with principles

The meetings in Zurich, the statement said, would deal only with principles that would guide the three factors in their search for a coalition Government.

Appointment of William S. Pfaff Jr., 41, as promotion manager of The Times-Picayune Publishing Company was announced Saturday by John F. Tims, president of the company.

Pfaff succeeds Martin Burke, who resigned.

The new promotion manager has been employed by the company since January, 1946, as a commercial artist in the advertising department.

He is a native of New Orleans and attended Allen Elementary school, Fortier High school and Soule business college.

From June, 1942, until December, 1945, Pfaff served in the Army Air Corps.

While in the service he attended radio school at Scott Field in Belleville, Ill..

Before entering the service, Pfaff for five years did clerical work with a general merchandising and wholesale firm in New Orleans.

He is married to the former Audrey Knecht and has a daughter, Karol, 13.

They reside at 4911 Miles Dr..

Washington

-- Thousands of bleacher-type seats are being erected along Pennsylvania Avenue between the Capitol and the White House for the big inaugural parade on Jan. 20.

Assuming the weather is halfway decent that day, hundreds of thousands of persons will mass along this thoroughfare as President John F. Kennedy and retiring President Dwight D. Eisenhower leave Capitol Hill following the oath-taking ceremonies and ride down this historic ceremonial route.

Pennsylvania Avenue, named for one of the original 13 states, perhaps is not the most impressive street in the District of Columbia from a commercial standpoint.

But from a historic viewpoint none can approach it.

Many buildings

Within view of the avenue are some of the United States government's tremendous buildings, plus shrines and monuments.

Of course, 1600 Pennsylvania, the White House, is the most famous address of the free world.

Within an easy walk from Capitol Hill where Pennsylvania Avenue comes together with Constitution Avenue, begins a series of great federal buildings, some a block long and all about seven-stories high.

Great chapters of history have been recorded along the avenue, now about 169 years old.

In the early spring of 1913 a few hundred thousand persons turned out to watch 5000 women parade.

They were the suffragettes and they wanted to vote.

In the 1920 presidential election they had that right and many of them did vote for the first time.

Seats on square

Along this avenue which saw marching soldiers from the War Between the States returning in 1865 is the National Archives building where hundreds of thousands of this country's most valuable records are kept.

Also the department of justice building is located where J. Edgar Hoover presides over the federal bureau of investigation.

Street car tracks run down the center of Pennsylvania, powered with lines that are underground.

Many spectators will be occupying seats and vantage points bordering Lafayette Square, opposite the White House.

In this historic square are several statues, but the one that stands out over the others is that of Gen. Andrew Jackson, hero of the Battle of New Orleans.

Moving past the presidential viewing stand and Lafayette Square will be at least 40 marching units.

About 16,000 military members of all branches of the armed forces will take part in the parade.

Division one of the parade will be the service academies.

Division two will include the representations of Massachusetts and Texas, the respective states of the President and of Vice-President L. B. Johnson.

Then will come nine other states in the order of their admission to the union.

Division three will be headed by the Marines followed by 12 states;;

division four will be headed by the Navy, followed by 11 states;;

division five, by the Air Force followed by 11 states.

Division six will be headed by the Coast Guard, followed by the reserve forces of all services, five states, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the trust territories and the Canal Zone.

Jackson, Miss.

-- What does 1961 offer in political and governmental developments in Mississippi??

Even for those who have been observing the political scene a long time, no script from the past is worth very much in gazing into the state's immediate political future.

This is largely because of the unpredictability of the man who operates the helm of the state government and is the elected leader of its two million inhabitants -- Gov. Ross Barnett.

Barnett, who came into office with no previous experience in public administration, has surrounded himself with confusion which not only keeps his foes guessing but his friends as well.

Consequently, it is uncertain after nearly 12 months in office just which direction the Barnett administration will take in the coming year.

Could be scramble

Some predict the administration will settle down during 1961 and iron out the rough edges which it has had thus far.

The builtin headache of the Barnett regime thus far has been the steady stream of job-seekers and others who feel they were given commitments by Barnett at some stage of his eight-year quest for the governor's office.

There are many who predict that should Barnett decide to call the Legislature back into special session, it will really throw his administration into a scramble.

Certainly nobody will predict that the next time the lawmakers come back together Barnett will be able to enjoy a re-enactment of the strange but successful `` honeymoon '' he had in the 1960 legislative session.

If Barnett doesn't call a special session in 1961, it will be the first year in the last decade that the Legislature has not met in regular or special session.

The odds favor a special session, more than likely early in the year.

Districts issue

Legislators always get restless for a special session( whether for the companionship or the $22.50 per diem is not certain) and if they start agitating.

Barnett is not expected to be able to withstand the pressure.

The issue which may make it necessary to have a session is the highly sensitive problem of cutting the state's congressional districts from six to five to eliminate one congressional seat.

With eyes focused on the third congressional district, the historic Delta district, and Congressman Frank E. Smith as the one most likely to go, the redistricting battle will put to a test the longstanding power which lawmakers from the Delta have held in the Legislature.

Mississippi's relations with the national Democratic party will be at a crossroads during 1961, with the first Democratic president in eight years in the White House.

Split badly during the recent presidential election into almost equally divided camps of party loyalists and independents, the Democratic party in Mississippi is currently a wreck.

And there has been no effort since the election to pull it back together.

Future clouded

Barnett, as the titular head of the Democratic party, apparently must make the move to reestablish relations with the national Democratic party or see a movement come from the loyalist ranks to completely bypass him as a party functionary.

With a Democratic administration, party patronage would normally begin to flow to Mississippi if it had held its Democratic solidarity in the November election.

Now, the picture is clouded, and even US Sens. James O. Eastland and John C. Stennis, who remained loyal to the ticket, are uncertain of their status.

Reports are that it is more than probable that the four congressmen from Mississippi who did not support the party ticket will be stripped of the usual patronage which flows to congressmen.

Baton Rouge, La.

-- The Gov. Jimmie H. Davis administration appears to face a difficult year in 1961, with the governor's theme of peace and harmony subjected to severe stresses.

The year will probably start out with segregation still the most troublesome issue.

But it might give way shortly to another vexing issue -- that of finances in state government.

The transition from segregation to finances might already be in progress, in the form of an administration proposal to hike the state sales tax from 2 per cent to 3 per cent.

The administration has said the sales tax proposal is merely part of the segregation strategy, since the revenues from the increase would be dedicated to a grant in aid program.

But the tardiness of the administration in making the dedication has caused legislators to suspect the tax bill was related more directly to an over-all shortage of cash than to segregation.

Legislators weary

Indeed, the administration's curious position on the sales tax was a major factor in contributing to its defeat.

The administration could not say why $28 million was needed for a grant-in-aid program.

The effectiveness of the governor in clearing up some of the inconsistencies revolving about the sales tax bill may play a part in determining whether it can muster the required two-thirds vote.

The tax bill will be up for reconsideration Wednesday in the House when the Legislature reconvenes.

Davis may use the tax bill as a means to effect a transition from special sessions of the Legislature to normalcy.

If it fails to pass, he can throw up his hands and say the Legislature would not support him in his efforts to prevent integration.

He could terminate special sessions of the Legislature.

Actually, Davis would have to toss in the towel soon anyway.

Many legislators are already weary and frustrated over the so-far losing battle to block token integration.

This is not the sort of thing most politicos would care to acknowledge publicly.

They would like to convey the notion something is being done, even though it is something they know to be ineffectual.

Underlying concern

Passage of the sales tax measure would also give Davis the means to effect a transition.

He could tell the Legislature they had provided the needed funds to carry on the battle.

Then he could tell them to go home, while the administration continued to wage the battle with the $28 million in extra revenues the sales tax measure would bring in over an eight months period.

It is difficult to be certain how the administration views that $28 million, since the views of one leader may not be the same as the views of another one.

But if the administration should find it does not need the $28 million for a grant-in-aid program, a not unlikely conclusion, it could very well seek a way to use the money for other purposes.

This would be in perfect consonance with the underlying concern in the administration -- the shortage of cash.

It could become an acute problem in the coming fiscal year.

If the administration does not succeed in passing the sales tax bill, or any other tax bill, it could very well be faced this spring at the fiscal session of the Legislature with an interesting dilemma.

Since the constitution forbids introduction of a tax bill at a fiscal session, the administration will either have to cut down expenses or inflate its estimates of anticipated revenues.

Constant problem

In either case, it could call a special session of the Legislature later in 1961 to make another stab at raising additional revenues through a tax raiser.

The prospect of cutting back spending is an unpleasant one for any governor.

It is one that most try to avoid, as long as they can see an alternative approach to the problem.

But if all alternatives should be clearly blocked off, it can be expected the Davis administration will take steps to trim spending at the spring session of the state Legislature.

This might be done to arouse those who have been squeezed out by the trims to exert pressure on the Legislature, so it would be more receptive to a tax proposal later in the year.

A constant problem confronting Davis on any proposals for new taxes will be the charge by his foes that he has not tried to economize.

Any tax bill also will revive allegations that some of his followers have been using their administration affiliations imprudently to profit themselves.

The new year might see some house-cleaning, either genuine or token, depending upon developments, to give Davis an opportunity to combat some of these criticisms.

City Controller Alexander Hemphill charged Tuesday that the bids on the Frankford Elevated repair project were rigged to the advantage of a private contracting company which had `` an inside track '' with the city.

Estimates of the city's loss in the $344,000 job have ranged as high as $200,000.

Shortcuts unnoticed

Hemphill said that the Hughes Steel Erection Co. contracted to do the work at an impossibly low cost with a bid that was far less than the `` legitimate '' bids of competing contractors.

The Hughes concern then took `` shortcuts '' on the project but got paid anyway, Hemphill said.

The Controller's charge of rigging was the latest development in an investigation which also brought these disclosures Tuesday:

The city has sued for the full amount of the $172,400 performance bond covering the contract.

The Philadelphia Transportation Co. is investigating the part its organization played in reviewing the project.

The signature of Harold V. Varani, former director of architecture and engineering in the Department of Public Property, appeared on payment vouchers certifying work on the project.

Varani has been fired on charges of accepting gifts from the contractor.

Managing Director Donald C. Wagner has agreed to cooperate fully with Hemphill after a period of sharp disagreement on the matter.

The announcement that the city would sue for recovery on the performance bond was made by City Solicitor David Berger at a press conference following a meeting in the morning with Wagner and other officials of the city and the PTC as well as representatives of an engineering firm that was pulled off the El project before its completion in 1959.

Concern bankrupt

The Hughes company and the Consolidated Industries, Inc., both of 3646 N. 2d St., filed for reorganization under the Federal bankruptcy law.

On Monday, the Hughes concern was formally declared bankrupt after its directors indicated they could not draw up a plan for reorganization.

Business relations between the companies and city have been under investigation by Hemphill and District Attorney James C. Crumlish, Jr..

Intervenes in case

The suit was filed later in the day in Common Pleas Court 7 against the Hughes company and two bonding firms.

Travelers Indemnity Co. and the Continental Casualty Co..

At Berger's direction, the city also intervened in the Hughes bankruptcy case in U. S. District Court in a move preliminary to filing a claim there.

`` I am taking the position that the contract was clearly violated '', Berger said.

The contract violations mostly involve failure to perform rehabilitation work on expansion joints along the El track.

The contract called for overhauling of 102 joints.

The city paid for work on 75, of which no more than 21 were repaired, Hemphill charged.

Wide range in bids

Hemphill said the Hughes concern contracted to do the repairs at a cost of $500 for each joint.

The bid from A. Belanger and Sons of Cambridge, Mass., which listed the same officers as Hughes, was $600 per joint.

But, Hemphill added, bids from other contractors ranged from $2400 to $3100 per joint.

Berger's decision to sue for the full amount of the performance bond was questioned by Wagner in the morning press conference.

Wagner said the city paid only $37,500 to the Hughes company.

`` We won't know the full amount until we get a full report '', Wagner said.

`` We can claim on the maximum amount of the bond '', Berger said.

Wagner replied, `` Can't you just see the headline:' City Hooked for $172,000' ''??

' know enough to sue'

Berger insisted that `` we know enough to sue for the full amount ''.

Douglas M. Pratt, president of the PTC, who attended the meeting, said the transit company is reviewing the work on the El.

`` We want to find out who knew about it '', Pratt said.

`` Certain people must have known about it ''.

`` The PTC is investigating the whole matter '', Pratt said.

Samuel D. Goodis, representing the Philadelphia Hotel Association, objected on Tuesday to a proposed boost by the city in licensing fees, saying that occupancy rates in major hotels here ranged from 48 to 74 percent last year.

Goodis voiced his objection before City Council's Finance Committee.

For hotels with 1000 rooms, the increased license fee would mean an expense of $5000 a year, Goodis said.

Testifies at hearing

His testimony came during a hearing on a bill raising fees for a wide variety of licenses, permits and city services.

The new fees are expected to raise an additional $740,000 in the remainder of 1961 and $2,330,000 more a year after that.

The ordinance would increase the fee for rooming houses, hotels and multi-family dwellings to $5 a room.

The cost of a license now is $2, with an annual renewal fee of $1.

Goodis said that single rooms account for 95 percent of the accomodations in some hotels.

Revenue estimated

The city expects the higher rooming house, hotel and apartment house fees to bring in an additional $457,000 a year.

The increase also was opposed by Leonard Kaplan, spokesman for the Home Builders Association of Philadelphia, on behalf of association members who operate apartment houses.

A proposal to raise dog license fees drew an objection from Councilwoman Virginia Knauer, who formerly raised pedigreed dogs.

The ordinance would increase fees from $1 for males and $2 for females to a flat $5 a dog.

Commissioner replies

Mrs. Knauer said she did not think dog owners should be penalized for the city's services to animal care.

In reply, Deputy Police Commissioner Howard R. Leary said that the city spends more than $115,000 annually to license and regulate dogs but collects only $43,000 in fees.

He reported that the city's contributions for animal care included $67,000 to the Women's S.P.C.A.;;

$15,000 to pay six policemen assigned as dog catchers and $15,000 to investigate dog bites.

Backs higher fees

City Finance Director Richard J. McConnell indorsed the higher fees, which, he said, had been under study for more than a year.

The city is not adequately compensated for the services covered by the fees, he said.

The new fee schedule also was supported by Commissioner of Licenses and Inspections Barnet Lieberman and Health Commissioner Eugene A. Gillis.

Petitions asking for a jail term for Norristown attorney Julian W. Barnard will be presented to the Montgomery County Court Friday, it was disclosed Tuesday by Horace A. Davenport, counsel for the widow of the man killed last Nov. 1 by Barnard's hit-run car.

The petitions will be presented in open court to President Judge William F. Dannehower, Davenport said.

Barnard, who pleaded no defense to manslaughter and hit-run charges, was fined $500 by Judge Warren K. Hess, and placed on two years' probation providing he does not drive during that time.

He was caught driving the day after the sentence was pronounced and given a warning.

Victim of the accident was Robert Lee Stansbery, 39.

His widow started the circulation of petitions after Barnard was reprimanded for violating the probation.

The City Planning Commission on Tuesday approved agreements between two redevelopers and the Redevelopment Authority for the purchase of land in the $300,000,000 Eastwick Redevelopment Area project.

The commission also approved a novel plan that would eliminate traffic hazards for pedestrians in the project.

One of the agreements calls for the New Eastwick Corp. to purchase a 1311 acre tract for $12,192,865.

The tract is bounded by Island Ave., Dicks Ave., 61st St., and Eastwick Ave..

Four parks planned

It is designated as Stage 1 Residential on the Redevelopment Authority's master plan and will feature row houses, garden apartments, four small parks, schools, churches, a shopping center and several small clusters of stores.

The corporation was formed by the Reynolds Metal Co. and the Samuel A. and Henry A. Berger firm, a Philadelphia builder, for work in the project.

The second agreement permits the authority to sell a 520-acre tract west of Stage 1 Residential to Philadelphia Builders Eastwick Corp., a firm composed of 10 Philadelphia area builders, which is interested in developing part of the project.

Would bar vehicles

The plan for eliminating traffic hazards for pedestrians was developed by Dr. Constantinos A. Doxiadis, former Minister of Reconstruction in Greece and a consulting planner for the New Eastwick Corp..

The plan calls for dividing the project into 16 sectors which would be barred to vehicular traffic.

It provides for a series of landscaped walkways and a central esplanade that would eventually run through the center of the entire two-and-a-half-mile length of the project.

The esplanade eliminates Grovers Ave., which on original plans ran through the center of the development.

The esplanade would feature pedestrian bridges over roads in the project.

Kansas City, Mo., Feb. 9( UPI)

-- The president of the Kansas City local of the International Association of Fire Fighters was severly injured today when a bomb tore his car apart as he left home for work.

Battalion Chief Stanton M. Gladden, 42, the central figure in a representation dispute between the fire fighters association and the teamsters union, suffered multiple fractures of both ankles.

He was in Baptist Memorial hospital.

Ignition sets off blast

The battalion chief said he had just gotten into his 1958 model automobile to move it from the driveway of his home so that he could take his other car to work.

`` I'd just turned on the ignition when there was a big flash and I was lying on the driveway '', he said.

Gladden's wife and two of his sons, John, 17, and Jim, 13, were inside the house.

The younger boy said the blast knocked him out of bed and against the wall.

Hood flies over house

The explosion sent the hood of the car flying over the roof of the house.

The left front wheel landed 100 feet away.

Police laboratory technicians said the explosive device, containing either TNT or nitroglycerine, was apparently placed under the left front wheel.

It was first believed the bomb was rigged to the car's starter.

Gladden had been the target of threatening telephone calls in recent months and reportedly received one last night.

The fire department here has been torn for months by dissension involving top personnel and the fight between the fire fighters association and the teamsters union.

Led fight on teamsters

Gladden has been an outspoken critic of the present city administration and led his union's battle against the teamsters, which began organizing city firemen in 1959.

The fire fighters association here offered a $5,000 reward for information leading to the arrest of the person or persons responsible for the bombing.

A $500 reward was offered by the association's local in Kansas City, Kas..

The association said it would post 24 hour guards at Gladden's home and at those of James Mining and Eugene Shiflett.

Mining is secretary-treasurer of the local and Shiflett is a member of its executive committee.

Both have been active in the association.

Ankara, Turkey, Oct. 24( AP)

-- Turkish political leaders bowed today to military pressure and agreed to form an emergency national front government with Gen. Cemal Gursel as president.

An agreement between the leaders of four parties which contested indecisive elections on Oct. 15 was reached after almost 18 hours of political bargaining under the threat of an army coup d'etat.

By-passing the military junta which has ruled Turkey since the overthrow of Premier Adnan Menderes 17 months ago, the army general staff, led by Gen. Cedvet Sunay, had set a deadline for the parties to join in a national coalition government.

The army leaders threatened to form a new military government if the parties failed to sign an eight point protocol agreeing on Gen. Gursel as president.

Gen. Gursel has headed the military junta the last 17 months.

The military also had demanded pledges that there would be no changes in the laws passed by the junta and no leaders of the Menderes regime now in prison would be pardoned.

Party leaders came out of the final meeting apparently satisfied and stated that complete agreement had been reached on a solution to the crisis created by the elections which left no party with enough strength to form a government on its own.

Vincent G. Ierulli has been appointed temporary assistant district attorney, it was announced Monday by Charles E. Raymond, District Attorney.

Ierulli will replace Desmond D. Connall who has been called to active military service but is expected back on the job by March 31.

Ierulli, 29, has been practicing in Portland since November, 1959.

He is a graduate of Portland University and the Northwestern College of Law.

He is married and the father of three children.

Helping foreign countries to build a sound political structure is more important than aiding them economically, E. M. Martin, assistant secretary of state for economic affairs told members of the World Affairs Council Monday night.

Martin, who has been in office in Washington, D. C., for 13 months spoke at the council's annual meeting at the Multnomah Hotel.

He told some 350 persons that the United States' challenge was to help countries build their own societies their own ways, following their own paths.

`` We must persuade them to enjoy a way of life which, if not identical, is congenial with ours '', he said but adding that if they do not develop the kind of society they themselves want it will lack ritiuality and loyalty.

Patience needed

Insuring that the countries have a freedom of choice, he said, was the biggest detriment to the Soviet Union.

He cited East Germany where after 15 years of Soviet rule it has become necessary to build a wall to keep the people in, and added, `` so long as people rebel, we must not give up ''.

Martin called for patience on the part of Americans.

`` The countries are trying to build in a decade the kind of society we took a century to build '', he said.

By leaving our doors open the United States gives other peoples the opportunity to see us and to compare, he said.

Individual help best

`` We have no reason to fear failure, but we must be extraordinarily patient '', the assistant secretary said.

Economically, Martin said, the United States could best help foreign countries by helping them help themselves.

Private business is more effective than government aid, he explained, because individuals are able to work with the people themselves.

The United States must plan to absorb the exported goods of the country, at what he termed a `` social cost ''.

Martin said the government has been working to establish firmer prices on primary products which may involve the total income of one country.

The Portland school board was asked Monday to take a positive stand towards developing and coordinating with Portland's civil defense more plans for the city's schools in event of attack.

But there seemed to be some difference of opinion as to how far the board should go, and whose advice it should follow.

The board members, after hearing the coordination plea from Mrs. Ralph H. Molvar, 1409 SW Maplecrest Dr., said they thought they had already been cooperating.

Chairman C. Richard Mears pointed out that perhaps this was not strictly a school board problem, in case of atomic attack, but that the board would cooperate so far as possible to get the children to where the parents wanted them to go.

Dr. Melvin W. Barnes, superintendent, said he thought the schools were waiting for some leadership, perhaps on the national level, to make sure that whatever steps of planning they took would `` be more fruitful '', and that he had found that other school districts were not as far along in their planning as this district.

`` Los Angeles has said they would send the children to their homes in case of disaster '', he said.

`` Nobody really expects to evacuate.

I think everybody is agreed that we need to hear some voice on the national level that would make some sense and in which we would have some confidence in following.

Mrs. Molvar, who kept reiterating her request that they `` please take a stand '', said, `` We must have faith in somebody -- on the local level, and it wouldn't be possible for everyone to rush to a school to get their children ''.

Dr. Barnes said that there seemed to be feeling that evacuation plans, even for a high school where there were lots of cars `` might not be realistic and would not work ''.

Mrs. Molvar asked again that the board join in taking a stand in keeping with Jack Lowe's program.

The board said it thought it had gone as far as instructed so far and asked for more information to be brought at the next meeting.

It was generally agreed that the subject was important and the board should be informed on what was done, is going to be done and what it thought should be done.

Salem( AP)

-- The statewide meeting of war mothers Tuesday in Salem will hear a greeting from Gov. Mark Hatfield.

Hatfield also is scheduled to hold a public United Nations Day reception in the state capitol on Tuesday.

His schedule calls for a noon speech Monday in Eugene at the Emerald Empire Kiwanis Club.

He will speak to Willamette University Young Republicans Thursday night in Salem.

On Friday he will go to Portland for the swearing in of Dean Bryson as Multnomah County Circuit Judge.

He will attend a meeting of the Republican State Central Committee Saturday in Portland and see the Washington-Oregon football game.

Beaverton School District No. 48 board members examined blueprints and specifications for two proposed junior high schools at a Monday night workshop session.

A bond issue which would have provided some $3.5 million for construction of the two 900-student schools was defeated by district voters in January.

Last week the board, by a 4 to 3 vote, decided to ask voters whether they prefer the 6-3-3( junior high school) system or the 8-4 system.

Board members indicated Monday night this would be done by an advisory poll to be taken on Nov. 15, the same date as a $581,000 bond election for the construction of three new elementary schools.

Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg will speak Sunday night at the Masonic Temple at a $25-a-plate dinner honoring Sen. Wayne L. Morse, Aj.

The dinner is sponsored by organized labor and is scheduled for 7 p.m..

Secretary Goldberg and Sen. Morse will hold a joint press conference at the Roosevelt Hotel at 4:30 p.m. Sunday, Blaine Whipple, executive secretary of the Democratic Party of Oregon, reported Tuesday.

Other speakers for the fund-raising dinner include Reps. Edith Green and Al Ullman, Labor Commissioner Norman Nilsen and Mayor Terry Schrunk, all Democrats.

Oak Grove( special)

-- Three positions on the Oak Lodge Water district board of directors have attracted 11 candidates.

The election will be Dec. 4 from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m..

Polls will be in the water office.

Incumbent Richard Salter seeks re-election and is opposed by Donald Huffman for the five-year term.

Incumbent William Brod is opposed in his re-election bid by Barbara Njust, Miles C. Bubenik and Frank Lee.

Five candidates seek the place vacated by Secretary Hugh G. Stout.

Seeking this two-year term are James Culbertson, Dwight M. Steeves, James C. Piersee, W.M. Sexton and Theodore W. Heitschmidt.

A stronger stand on their beliefs and a firmer grasp on their future were taken Friday by delegates to the 29th general council of the Assemblies of God, in session at the Memorial Coliseum.

The council revised, in an effort to strengthen, the denomination's 16 basic beliefs adopted in 1966.

The changes, unanimously adopted, were felt necessary in the face of modern trends away from the Bible.

The council agreed it should more firmly state its belief in and dependence on the Bible.

At the adoption, the Rev. T. F. Zimmerman, general superintendent, commented, `` The Assemblies of God has been a bulwark for fundamentalism in these modern days and has, without compromise, stood for the great truths of the Bible for which men in the past have been willing to give their lives ''.

New point added

Many changes involved minor editing and clarification;;

however, the first belief stood for entire revision with a new third point added to the list.

The first of 16 beliefs of the denomination, now reads:

`` The scriptures, both Old and New Testament, are verbally inspired of God and are the revelation of God to man, the infallible, authoritative rule of faith and conduct ''.

The third belief, in six points, emphasizes the Diety of the Lord Jesus Christ, and:

-- emphasizes the Virgin birth

-- the sinless life of Christ

-- His miracles

-- His substitutionary work on the cross

-- His bodily resurrection from the dead

-- and His exaltation to the right hand of God.

Super again elected

Friday afternoon the Rev. T. F. Zimmerman was reelected for his second consecutive two-year term as general superintendent of Assemblies of God.

His offices are in Springfield, Mo..

Election came on the nominating ballot.

Friday night the delegates heard the need for their forthcoming program, `` Breakthrough '' scheduled to fill the churches for the next two years.

In his opening address Wednesday the Rev. Mr. Zimmerman, urged the delegates to consider a 10-year expansion program, with `` Breakthrough '' the theme for the first two years.

The Rev. R. L. Brandt, national secretary of the home missions department, stressed the need for the first two years' work.

`` Surveys show that one out of three Americans has vital contact with the church.

This means that more than 100 million have no vital touch with the church or religious life '', he told delegates Friday.

Church loses pace

Talking of the rapid population growth( upwards of 12,000 babies born daily) with an immigrant entering the United States every 1-1/2 minutes, he said `` our organization has not been keeping pace with this challenge ''.

`` In 35 years we have opened 7,000 churches '', the Rev. Mr. Brandt said, adding that the denomination had a national goal of one church for every 10,000 persons.

`` In this light we need 1,000 churches in Illinois, where we have 200;;

800 in Southern New England, we have 60;;

we need 100 in Rhode Island, we have none '', he said.

To step up the denomination's program, the Rev. Mr. Brandt suggested the vision of 8,000 new Assemblies of God churches in the next 10 years.

To accomplish this would necessitate some changes in methods, he said.

' church meets change'

`` The church's ability to change her methods is going to determine her ability to meet the challenge of this hour ''.

A capsule view of proposed plans includes:

-- Encouraging by every means, all existing Assemblies of God churches to start new churches.

-- Engaging mature, experienced men to pioneer or open new churches in strategic population centers.

-- Surrounding pioneer pastors with vocational volunteers( laymen, who will be urged to move into the area of new churches in the interest of lending their support to the new project).

-- Arranging for ministerial graduates to spend from 6-12 months as apprentices in well-established churches.

U.S. Dist. Judge Charles L. Powell denied all motions made by defense attorneys Monday in Portland's insurance fraud trial.

Denials were of motions of dismissal, continuance, mistrial, separate trial, acquittal, striking of testimony and directed verdict.

In denying motions for dismissal, Judge Powell stated that mass trials have been upheld as proper in other courts and that `` a person may join a conspiracy without knowing who all of the conspirators are ''.

Attorney Dwight L. Schwab, in behalf of defendant Philip Weinstein, argued there is no evidence linking Weinstein to the conspiracy, but Judge Powell declared this is a matter for the jury to decide.

Proof lack charged

Schwab also declared there is no proof of Weinstein's entering a conspiracy to use the U.S. mails to defraud, to which federal prosecutor A. Lawrence Burbank replied:

`` It is not necessary that a defendant actually have conpired to use the U.S. mails to defraud as long as there is evidence of a conspiracy, and the mails were then used to carry it out ''.

In the afternoon, defense attorneys began the presentation of their cases with opening statements, some of which had been deferred until after the government had called witnesses and presented its case.

Miami, Fla., March 17

-- The Orioles tonight retained the distinction of being the only winless team among the eighteen Major-League clubs as they dropped their sixth straight spring exhibition decision, this one to the Kansas City Athletics by a score of 5 to 3.

Indications as late as the top of the sixth were that the Birds were to end their victory draught as they coasted along with a 3-to-o advantage.

Siebern hits homer

Over the first five frames, Jack Fisher, the big righthander who figures to be in the middle of Oriole plans for a drive on the 1961 American League pennant, held the A's scoreless while yielding three scattered hits.

Then Dick Hyde, submarine-ball hurler, entered the contest and only five batters needed to face him before there existed a 3-to-3 deadlock.

A two-run homer by Norm Siebern and a solo blast by Bill Tuttle tied the game, and single runs in the eighth and ninth gave the Athletics their fifth victory in eight starts.

House throws wild

With one down in the eighth, Marv Throneberry drew a walk and stole second as Hyde fanned Tuttle.

Catcher Frank House's throw in an effort to nab Throneberry was wide and in the dirt.

Then Heywood Sullivan, Kansas City catcher, singled up the middle and Throneberry was across with what proved to be the winning run.

Rookie southpaw George Stepanovich relieved Hyde at the start of the ninth and gave up the A's fifth tally on a walk to second baseman Dick Howser, a wild pitch, and Frank Cipriani's single under Shortstop Jerry Adair's glove into center.

The Orioles once again performed at the plate in powderpuff fashion, gathering only seven blows off the offerings of three Kansas City pitchers.

Three were doubles, Brooks Robinson getting a pair and Marv Breeding one.

Hartman impressive

Bill Kunkel, Bob Hartman and Ed Keegan did the mound chores for the club down from West Palm Beach to play the game before 767 paying customers in Miami Stadium.

The Birds got five hits and all three of their runs off Kunkel before Hartman took over in the top of the fourth.

Hartman, purchased by the A's from the Milwaukee Braves last fall, allowed no hits in his scoreless three-inning appearance, and merited the triumph.

Keegan, a 6-foot-3-inch 158-pounder, gave up the Orioles' last two safeties over the final three frames, escaping a load of trouble in the ninth when the Birds threatened but failed to tally.

Robinson doubles again

In the ninth, Robinson led off with his second double of the night, a blast off the fence 375 feet deep into left.

Whitey Herzog, performing in right as the Orioles fielded possibly their strongest team of the spring, worked Keegan for a base on balls.

Then three consecutive pinch-hitters failed to produce.

Pete Ward was sent in for House and, after failing in a bunt attempt, popped to Howser on the grass back of short.

John Powell, batting for Adair, fanned after fouling off two 2-and-2 pitches, and Buddy Barker, up for Stepanovich, bounced out sharply to Jerry Lumpe at second to end the 2-hour-and-27-minute contest.

The Orioles got a run in the first inning when Breeding, along with Robinson, the two Birds who got a pair of hits, doubled to right center, moved to third on Russ Snyder's single to right and crossed on Kunkel's wild pitch into the dirt in front of the plate.

The Flock added a pair of tallies in the third on three straight hits after two were out.

Jackie Brandt singled deep into the hole at short to start the rally.

Lumpe errs

Jim Gentile bounced a hard shot off Kunkel's glove and beat it out for a single, and when Lumpe grabbed the ball and threw it over first baseman Throneberry's head Brandt took third and Gentile second on the error.

Then Robinson slammed a long double to left center to score both runners.

When Robinson tried to stretch his blow into a triple, he was cut down in a close play at third, Tuttle to Andy Carey.

The detailed rundown on the Kansas City scoring in the sixth went like this:

Lumpe worked a walk as the first batter to face Hyde and romped around as Siebern blasted Hyde's next toss 415 feet over the scoreboard in right center.

Carey Singles

Carey singled on a slow-bouncing ball to short which Robinson cut across to field and threw wide to first.

It was ruled a difficult chance and a hit.

Then Throneberry rapped into a fast double play.

Breeding to Adair to Gentile, setting up Tuttle's 390-foot homer over the wall in left center.

If the Orioles are to break their losing streak within the next two days, it will have to be at the expense of the American League champion New York Yankees, who come in here tomorrow for a night game and a single test Sunday afternoon.

Miami, Fla., March 17

-- The flavor of Baltimore's Florida Grapefruit League news ripened considerably late today when the Orioles were advised that Ron Hansen has fulfilled his obligations under the Army's military training program and is ready for belated spring training.

Hansen, who slugged the 1960 Oriole high of 22 homers and drove in 86 runs on a

freshman average, completes the Birds' spring squad at 49 players.

The big, 22-year-old shortstop, the 1960 American league `` rookie-of-the-year '', flew here late this afternoon from Baltimore, signed his contract for an estimated $15,000 and was a spectator at tonight's 5-to-3 loss to Kansas City -- the winless Birds' sixth setback in a row.

15 pounds lighter

The 6-foot 3-inch Hansen checked in close to 200 pounds, 15 pounds lighter than his reporting weight last spring.

He hopes to melt off an additional eight pounds before the Flock breaks camp three weeks hence.

When he was inducted into the Army at Fort Knox, Ky., Hansen's weight had dropped to 180 -- `` too light for me to be at my best '' he said.

`` I feel good physically '', Hansen added, `` but I think I'll move better carrying a little less weight than I'm carrying now ''.

Seeks `` improved fielding ''

The rangy, Albany( Cal.) native, a surprise slugging sensation for the Flock last year as well as a defensive whiz, set `` improved fielding '' as his 1961 goal.

`` I think I can do a better job with the glove, now that I know the hitters around the league a little better '', he said.

Hansen will engage in his first workout at Miami Stadium prior to the opening tomorrow night of a two-game weekend series with the New York Yankees.

Skinny Brown and Hoyt Wilhelm, the Flock's veteran knuckleball specialists, are slated to oppose the American League champions in tomorrow's 8 P.M. contest.

Duren, Sheldon on hill

Ryne Duren and Roland Sheldon, a rookie righthander who posted a 15-1 record last year for the Yanks' Auburn( N.Y.) farm club of the Class-D New York-Pennsylvania League, are the probable rival pitchers.

Twenty-one-year-old Milt Pappas and Jerry Walker, 22, are scheduled to share the Oriole mound chores against the Bombers' Art Ditmar in Sunday's 2 P.M. encounter.

Ralph Houk, successor to Casey Stengel at the Yankee helm, plans to bring the entire New York squad here from St. Petersburg, including Joe Dimaggio and large crowds are anticipated for both weekend games.

The famed Yankee Clipper, now retired, has been assisting as a batting coach.

Squad cut near

Pitcher Steve Barber joined the club one week ago after completing his hitch under the Army's accelerated wintertime military course, also at Fort Knox, Ky..

The 22-year-old southpaw enlisted earlier last fall than did Hansen.

Baltimore's bulky spring-training contingent now gradually will be reduced as Manager Paul Richards and his coaches seek to trim it down to a more streamlined and workable unit.

`` Take a ride on this one '', Brooks Robinson greeted Hansen as the Bird third sacker grabbed a bat, headed for the plate and bounced a third-inning two-run double off the left-centerfield wall tonight.

It was the first of two doubles by Robinson, who was in a mood to celebrate.

Just before game time, Robinson's pretty wife, Connie informed him that an addition to the family can be expected late next summer.

Unfortunately, Brooks's teammates were not in such festive mood as the Orioles expired before the seven-hit pitching of three Kansas City rookie hurlers.

Hansen arrived just before nightfall, two hours late, in company with Lee MacPhail;;

J. A. W. Iglehart, chairman of the Oriole board of directors, and Public Relations Director Jack Dunn.

Their flight was delayed, Dunn said, when a boarding ramp inflicted some minor damage to the wing of the plane.

Ex-Oriole Clint Courtney, now catching for the A's is all for the American League's 1961 expansion to the West Coast.

`` But they shouldda brought in Tokyo, too '', added Old Scrapiron.

`` Then we'd really have someplace to go ''.

Bowie, Md., March 17

-- Gaining her second straight victory, Norman B., Small, Jr.'s Garden Fresh, a 3-year-old filly, downed promising colts in the $4,500 St. Patrick's Day Purse, featured seventh race here today, and paid $7.20 straight.

Toying with her field in the early stages, Garden Fresh was asked for top speed only in the stretch by Jockey Philip Grimm and won by a length and a half in 1.24 3-5 for the 7 furlongs.

8,280 attend races

Richard M. Forbes's Paget, which had what seemed to be a substantial lead in the early stages, tired rapidly nearing the wire and was able to save place money only a head in front of Glen T. Hallowell's Milties Miss.

A bright sun and brisk wind had the track in a fast condition for the first time this week and 8,280 St. Patty Day celebrants bet $842,617 on the well-prepared program.

Prior to the featured race, the stewards announced that apprentice James P. Verrone is suspended ten days for crowding horses and crossing the field sharply in two races on Wednesday.

Culmone gets first win

Garden Fresh, the result of a mating of Better Self and Rosy Fingered, seems to improve with each start and appeared to win the St. Patrick's Day Purse with some speed in reserve.

She was moving up to the allowance department after winning a $10,000 claiming event.

Cleveland, March 17( AP)

-- George Kerr, the swift-striding Jamaican, set a meet record in the 600-yard run in the Knights of Columbus track meet tonight, beating Purdue's Dave Mills in a hot duel in 1.10.1.

Kerr, who set the world record earlier this month in New York with a clocking of 1.09.3, wiped out Mills's early pace and beat the young Big 10 quarter-mile king by 5 yards.

Both were under the meet mark of 1.10.8 set in 1950 by Mal Whitfield.

Mills shot out in front and kept the lead through two thirds of the race.

Then Kerr, a graduate student from Illinois, moved past him on a straightaway and held off Mills's challenge on the final turn.

Mills was timed in 1.10.4.

The crowd at the twenty-first annual K. of C. Games, final indoor meet of the season, got a thrill a few minutes earlier when a slender, bespectacled woman broke the one-week-old world record in the half-mile run.

Mrs. Grace Butcher, of nearby Chardon, a 27-year-old housewife who has two children, finished in 2.21.6.

She snapped five tenths of a second off the mark set by Helen Shipley, of Wellsley College, in the National A.A.U. meet in Columbus, Ohio.

San Francisco, March 17( AP)

-- Bobby Waters of Sylvania, Ga., relief quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers of the National Football League, will undergo a knee operation tomorrow at Franklin Hospital here.

Waters injured his left knee in the last game of the 1960 season.

While working out in Sylvania a swelling developed in the knee and he came here to consult the team physician.

St. Petersburg, Fla., March 17( AP)

-- Two errors by New York Yankee shortstop Tony Kubek in the eleventh inning donated four unearned runs and a 5-to-2 victory to the Chicago White Sox today.

Austin, Texas

-- A Texas halfback who doesn't even know the team's plays, Eldon Moritz, ranks fourth in Southwest Conference scoring after three games.

Time stands still every time Moritz, a 26-year-old Army Signal Corps veteran, goes into the field.

Although he never gets to play while the clock is running, he gets a big kick -- several every Saturday, in fact -- out of football.

Moritz doesn't even have a nose guard or hip pads but he's one of the most valuable members of the Longhorn team that will be heavily favored Saturday over Oklahoma in the Cotton Bowl.

That's because he already has kicked 14 extra points in 15 tries.

He ran his string of successful conversions this season to 13 straight before one went astray last Saturday night in the 41-8 slaughter of Washington State.

Moritz is listed on the Longhorn roster as a right halfback, the position at which he lettered on the 1956 team.

But ask coach Darrell Royal what position he plays and you'll get the quick response, `` place-kicker ''.

A 208-pound, 6-foot 1-inch senior from Stamford, Moritz practices nothing but place-kicking.

Last year, when he worked out at halfback all season, he didn't get into a single game.

`` This year, coach Royal told me if I'd work on my place-kicking he thought he could use me '', said Moritz.

`` So I started practicing on it in spring training.

Moritz was bothered during the first two games this year by a pulled muscle in the thigh of his right( kicking) leg and, as a result, several of his successful conversions have gone barely far enough.

Moritz said Monday his leg feels fine and, as a result, he hopes to start practicing field goals this week.

He kicked several while playing at Stamford High School, including one that beat Anson, 3-0, in a 1953 district game.

`` I kicked about 110 extra points in 135 tries during three years in high school '', he said, `` and made 26 in a row at one time.

I never did miss one in a playoff game -- I kicked about 20 in the five playoff games my last two years ''.

Moritz came to Texas in 1954 but his freshman football efforts were hampered by a knee injury.

He missed the 1955 season because of an operation on the ailing knee, then played 77 minutes in 1956.

His statistical record that year, when Texas won only one game and lost nine, was far from impressive: he carried the ball three times for a net gain of 10 yards, punted once for 39 yards and caught one pass for 13 yards.

He went into the Army in March, 1957, and returned two years later.

But he was scholastically ineligible in 1959 and merely present last season.

Place kicking is largely a matter of timing, Moritz declared.

`` Once you get the feel of it, there's not much to it.

I've tried to teach some of the other boys to kick and some of them can't seem to get the feel.

Practice helps you to get your timing down.

`` It's kind of like golf -- if you don't swing a club very often, your timing gets off ''.

Moritz, however, kicks only about 10 or 12 extra points during each practice session.

`` If you kick too much, your leg gets kinda dead '', he explained.

Footnotes:

In their first three games, the Longhorns have had the ball 41 times and scored 16 times, or 40 per cent;;

their total passing yardage in three games, 447 on 30 completions in 56 attempts, is only 22 yards short of their total passing yardage in 1959, when they made 469 on 37 completions in 86 tries.

Tailback James Saxton already has surpassed his rushing total for his brilliant sophomore season, when he netted 271 yards on 55 carries;;

he now has 273 yards in 22 tries during three games.

Saxton has made only one second-half appearance this season and that was in the Washington State game, for four plays: he returned the kickoff 30 yards, gained five yards through the line and then uncorked a 56-yard touchdown run before retiring to the bench.

Wingback Jack Collins injured a knee in the Washington State game but insists he'll be ready for Oklahoma.

Last week, when Royal was informed that three Longhorns were among the conference's top four in rushing, he said: `` That won't last long ''.

It didn't;;

Monday, he had four Longhorns in the top four.

A good feeling prevailed on the SMU coaching staff Monday, but attention quickly turned from Saturday's victory to next week's problem: Rice University.

The Mustangs don't play this week.

`` We're just real happy for the players '', Coach Bill Meek said of the 9-7 victory over the Air Force Academy.

`` I think the big thing about the game was that our kids for the third straight week stayed in there pitching and kept the pressure on.

It was the first time we've been ahead this season( when John Richey kicked what proved to be the winning field goal) ''.

Assistant coach John Cudmore described victory as `` a good feeling, I think, on the part of the coaches and the players.

We needed it and we got it ''.

Meek expressed particular gratification at the defensive performances of end Happy Nelson and halfback Billy Gannon.

Both turned in top jobs for the second straight game.

`` Nelson played magnificent football '', Meek praised.

`` He knocked down the interference and made key stops lots of times.

And he caused the fumble that set up our touchdown.

He broke that boy( Air Force fullback Nick Arshinkoff) in two and knocked him loose from the football ''.

Gannon contributed saving plays on the Falcons' aerial thrusts in the late stages.

One was on a fourth-down screen pass from the Mustang 21 after an incomplete pass into Gannon's territory.

`` As soon as it started to form, Gannon spotted it '', Meek said.

`` He timed it just right and broke through there before the boy( halfback Terry Isaacson) had time to turn around.

He really crucified him he nailed it for a yard loss ''.

The Air Force's, and the game's, final play, was a long pass by quarterback Bob McNaughton which Gannon intercepted on his own 44 and returned 22 yards.

`` He just lay back there and waited for it '', Meek said.

`` He almost brought it back all the way ''.

Except for sophomore center Mike Kelsey and fullback Mike Rice, Meek expects the squad to be physically sound for Rice.

`` Kelsey is very doubtful for the Rice game '', Meek said.

`` He'll be out of action all this week.

He got hit from the blind side by the split end coming back on the second play of the game.

There is definitely some ligament damage in his knee ''.

Rice has not played since injuring a knee in the opener with Maryland.

`` He's looking a lot better, and he's able to run '', Meek explained.

`` We'll let him do a lot of running this week, but I don't know if he'll be able to play ''.

The game players saw the Air Force film Monday, ran for 30 minutes, then went in, while the reserves scrimmaged for 45 minutes.

`` We'll work hard Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday '', Meek said, `` and probably will have a good scrimmage Friday.

We'll work out about an hour on Saturday, then we'll work Monday and Tuesday of next week, then taper off ''.

SMU will play the Owls at Rice Stadium in Houston in a night game Saturday, Oct. 21.

Huddle hearsay

-- Held out of Texas Tech's sweat-suits drill Monday at Lubbock was tackle Richard Stafford, who is undergoing treatment for a leg injury suffered in the Raiders' 38-7 loss to Texas A& M Because of its important game with Arkansas coming up Saturday, Baylor worked out in the rain Monday -- mud or no mud.

End Gene Raesz, who broke a hand in the Owl's game with LSU, was back working out with Rice Monday, and John Nichols, sophomore guard, moved back into action after a week's idleness with an ankle injury.

The Texas Aggies got a day off Monday -- a special gift from Coach Jim Myers for its conference victory last Saturday night, but Myers announced that halfback George Hargett, shaken up in the Tech game, would not play against Trinity Saturday.

Halfback Bud Priddy, slowed for almost a month by a slowly-mending sprained ankle, joined TCU's workout Monday.

The Dallas Texans were back home Monday with their third victory in four American Football League starts -- a 19-12 triumph over the Denver Broncos -- but their visit will be a short one.

The Texans have two more road games -- at Buffalo and Houston -- before they play for the home folks again, and it looks as if coach Hank Stram's men will meet the Bills just as they are developing into the kind of team they were expected to be in pre-season reckonings.

Buffalo coach Buster Ramsey, who has become one of the game's greatest collectors of quarterbacks, apparently now has found a productive pair in two ex-National Football Leaguers, M. C. Reynolds and Warren Rabb.

Rabb, the former Louisiana State field general, came off the bench for his debut with the Bills Sunday and directed his new team to a 22-12 upset victory over the Houston Oilers, defending league champions.

`` Just our luck ''!!

Exclaimed Stram.

`` Buster would solve that quarterback problem just as we head that way ''.

Ramsey has a thing or two to mutter about himself, for the Dallas defensive unit turned in another splendid effort against Denver, and the Texans were able to whip the dangerous Broncs without the fullbacking of a top star, Jack Spikes, though he did the team's place-kicking while nursing a knee injury.

`` Our interior line and out linebackers played exceptionally well '', said Stram Monday after he and his staff reviewed movies of the game.

`` In fact our whole defensive unit did a good job ''.

The Texans won the game through ball control, with Quarterback Cotton Davidson throwing only 17 passes.

`` We always like to keep the ball as much as we can against Denver because they have such an explosive attack '', explained Stram.

`` They can be going along, doing little damage, then bang, bang -- they can hit a couple of passes on you for touchdowns and put you in trouble ''.

The Broncs did hit two quick strikes in the final period against the Texans, but Dallas had enough of a lead to hold them off.

The principal tactic in controlling the ball was giving it to Abner Haynes, the flashy halfback.

He was called upon 26 times -- more than all of the other ball-carriers combined -- and delivered 145 yards.

The Texans made themselves a comforting break on the opening kickoff when Denver's Al Carmichael was jarred loose from the ball when Dave Grayson, the speedy halfback, hit him and Guard Al Reynolds claimed it for Dallas.

A quick touchdown resulted.

`` That permitted us to start controlling the ball right away '', said Stram, quipping, `` I think I'll put that play in the book ''.

The early Southwest Conference football leaders -- Texas, Arkansas and Texas A& M -- made a big dent in the statistics last week.

Texas' 545-yard spree against Washington State gave the Longhorns a 3-game total offense of 1,512 yards( 1,065 rushing and 447 passing) a new SWC high.

Arkansas combined 280 yards rushing with 64 yards passing( on 5 completions in 7 tosses) and a tough defense to whip TCU, and A& M, with a 38-point bulge against Texas Tech ran up its biggest total loop play since 1950.

Completing 12 of 15 passes for 174 yards, the Aggies had a total offense of 361 yards.

Texas leads in per-game rushing averages, 355 yards, and passing 149( to Baylor's 126), but idle Baylor has the best defensive record( 187.5 yards per game to Texas' 189).

A& M has the best defense against passes, 34.7 yards per game.

Not satisfied with various unofficial checks on the liveliness of baseballs currently in use, the major leagues have ordered their own tests, which are in progress at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Rookie Ron Nischwitz continued his pinpoint pitching Monday night as the Bears made it two straight over Indianapolis, 5-3.

The husky 6-3, 205-pound lefthander, was in command all the way before an on-the-scene audience of only 949 and countless of television viewers in the Denver area.

It was Nischwitz' third straight victory of the new season and ran the Grizzlies' winning streak to four straight.

They now lead Louisville by a full game on top of the American Association pack.

Nischwitz fanned six and walked only Charley Hinton in the third inning.

He has given only the one pass in his 27 innings, an unusual characteristic for a southpaw.

The Bears took the lead in the first inning, as they did in Sunday's opener, and never lagged.

Dick McAuliffe cracked the first of his two doubles against Lefty Don Rudolph to open the Bear's attack.

After Al Paschal gruonded out, Jay Cooke walked and Jim McDaniel singled home McAuliffe.

Alusik then moved Cooke across with a line drive to left.

Jay Porter drew a base on balls to fill the bases but Don Wert's smash was knocked down by Rudolph for the putout.

The Bears added two more in the fifth when McAuliffe dropped a double into the leftfield corner, Paschal doubled down the rightfield line and Cooke singled off Phil Shartzer's glove.

Nischwitz was working on a 3-hitter when the Indians bunched three of their eight hits for two runs in the sixth.

Chuck Hinton tripled to the rightfield corner, Cliff Cook and Dan Pavletich singled and Gaines' infield roller accounted for the tallies.

The Bears added their last run in the sixth on Alusik's double and outfield flies by Porter and Wert.

Gaines hammered the ball over the left fence for the third Indianapolis run in the ninth.

Despite the 45-degree weather the game was clicked off in 1:48, thanks to only three bases on balls and some good infield play.

Chico Ruiz made a spectacular play on Alusik's grounder in the hole in the fourth and Wert came up with some good stops and showed a strong arm at third base.

Bingles and bobbles:

Cliff Cook accounted for three of the Tribe's eight hits.

It was the season's first night game and an obvious refocusing of the lights are in order.

The infield was well flooded but the expanded outfield was much too dark.

Mary Dobbs Tuttle was back at the organ.

Among the spectators was the noted exotic dancer, Patti Waggin who is Mrs. Don Rudolph when off the stage.

Lefty Wyman Carey, another Denver rookie, will be on the mound against veteran John Tsitouris at 8 o'clock Tuesday night.

Ed Donnelly is still bothered by a side injury and will miss his starting turn.

Dallas, Tex., May 1 --( AP)

-- Kenny Lane of Muskegon, Mich., world's seventh ranked lightweight, had little trouble in taking a unanimous decision over Rip Randall of Tyler, Tex., here Monday night.

St. Paul-Minneapolis, May 1 --( AP)

-- Billy Gardner's line double, which just eluded the diving Minnie Minoso in left field, drove in Jim Lemon with the winning run with two out in the last of the ninth to give the Minnesota Twins a 6-5 victory over the Chicago White Sox Monday.

Lemon was on with his fourth single of the game, a liner to center.

He came all the way around on Gardner's hit before 5777 fans.

It was Gardner's second run batted in of the game and his only ones of the year.

Turk Lown was tagged with the loss, his second against no victories, while Ray Moore won his second game against a single loss.

The Twins tied the score in the sixth inning when Reno Bertoia beat out a high chopper to third base and scored on Lenny Green's double to left.

The White Sox had taken a 5-4 lead in the top of the sixth on a pair of pop fly hits -- a triple by Roy Sievers and single by Camilo Carreon -- a walk and a sacrifice fly.

Jim Landis' 380-foot home run over left in the first inning gave the Sox a 1-0 lead, but Harmon Killebrew came back in the bottom of the first with his second homer in two days with the walking Bob Allison aboard.

Al Smith's 340-blast over left in the fourth -- his fourth homer of the campaign -- tied the score and Carreon's first major league home run in the fifth put the Sox back in front.

A double by Green, Allison's run-scoring 2-baser, an infield single by Lemon and Gardner's solid single to center put the Twins back in front in the last of the fifth.

Ogden, Utah, May 1 --( AP)

-- Boston Red Sox Outfielder Jackie Jensen said Monday night he was through playing baseball.

`` I've had it '', he told a newsman.

`` I know when my reflexes are gone and I'm not going to be any 25th man on the ball club ''.

This was the first word from Jensen on his sudden walkout.

Jensen got only six hits in 46 at-bats for a batting average in the first 12 games.

He took a midnight train out of Cleveland Saturday, without an official word to anybody, and has stayed away from newsmen on his train trip across the nation to Reno, Nev., where his wife, former Olympic Diving Champion Zoe Ann Olsen, awaited.

She said, when she learned Jackie was heading home: `` I'm just speculating, but I have to think Jack feels he's hurting Boston's chances ''.

The Union Pacific Railroad streamliner, City of San Francisco, stopped in Ogden, Utah, for a few minutes.

Sports Writer Ensign Ritchie of the Ogden Standard Examiner went to his compartment to talk with him.

The conductor said to Ritchie: `` I don't think you want to talk to him.

You'll probably get a ball bat on the head.

He's mad at the world ''.

But Jackie had gone into the station.

Ritchie walked up to him at the magazine stand.

`` I told him who I was and he was quite cold.

But he warmed up after a while.

I told him what Liston had said and he said Liston was a double-crosser and said anything he( Liston) got was through a keyhole.

He said he had never talked to Liston ''.

Liston is Bill Liston, baseball writer for the Boston Traveler, who quoted Jensen as saying:

`` I can't hit anymore.

I can't run.

I can't throw.

Suddenly my reflexes are gone.

Just when it seems baseball might be losing its grip on the masses up pops heroics to start millions of tongues to wagging.

And so it was over the weekend what with 40-year-old Warren Spahn pitching his no-hit masterpiece against the Giants and the Giants' Willie Mays retaliating with a record-tying 4-homer spree Sunday.

Both, of course, were remarkable feats and further embossed the fact that baseball rightfully is the national pastime.

Of the two cherished achievements the elderly Spahn's hitless pitching probably reached the most hearts.

It was a real stimulant to a lot of guys I know who have moved past the 2-score-year milestone.

And one of the Milwaukee rookies sighed and remarked, `` Wish I was 40, and a top-grade big leaguer.

The modest and happy Spahn waved off his new laurels as one of those good days.

But there surely can be no doubt about the slender southpaw belonging with the all-time great lefthanders in the game's history.

Yes, with Bob Grove, Carl Hubbell, Herb Pennock, Art Nehf, Vernon Gomez, et al.

Spahn not only is a superior pitcher but a gentlemanly fine fellow, a ball player's ball player, as they say in the trade.

I remember his beardown performance in a meaningless exhibition game at Bears Stadium Oct. 14, 1951, before a new record crowd for the period of 18,792.

`` Spahnie doesn't know how to merely go through the motions '', remarked Enos Slaughter, another all-out guy, who played rightfield that day and popped one over the clubhouse.

The spectacular Mays, who reaches a decade in the big leagues come May 25, joined six other sluggers who walloped four home runs in a span of nine innings.

Incidentally, only two did it before a home audience.

Bobby Lowe of Boston was the first to hit four at home and Gil Hodges turned the trick in Brooklyn's Ebbetts Field.

Ed Delahanty and Chuck Klein of the Phillies, the Braves' Joe Adcock, Lou Gehrig of the Yankees, Pat Seerey of the White Sox and Rocky Colavito, then with Cleveland, made their history on the road.

Willie's big day revived the running argument about the relative merits of Mays and Mickey Mantle.

This is an issue which boils down to a matter of opinion, depending on whether you're an American or National fan and anti or pro-Yankee.

The record books, however, would favor the Giants' ace.

In four of his nine previous seasons Mays hit as many as 25 home runs and stole as many as 25 bases.

Once the figure was 30-30.

Willie's lifetime batting average of is 11 points beyond Mickey's.

The Giants who had been anemic with the bat in their windy Candlestick Park suddenly found the formula in Milwaukee's park.

It will forever be a baseball mystery how a team will suddenly start hitting after a distressing slump.

The Denver-area TV audience was privileged to see Mays' four home runs, thanks to a new arrangement made by Bob Howsam that the games are not to be blacked out when his Bears are playing at home.

This rule providing for a blackout of televised baseball 30 minutes before the start of a major or minor league game in any area comes from the game's top rulers.

The last couple of years the Bears management got the business from the `` Living Room Athletic Club '' when games were cut off.

Actually they were helpless to do anything about the nationwide policy.

This year, I am told, the CBS network will continue to abide by the rule but NBC will play to a conclusion here.

There are two more Sunday afternoons when the situation will arise.

It is an irritable rule that does baseball more harm than good, especially at the minor league level.

You would be surprised how many fans purposely stayed away from Bears Stadium last year because of the television policy.

This dissatisfaction led to Howsam's request that the video not be terminated before the end of the game.

Cincinnati, Ohio( AP)

-- The powerful New York Yankees won their 19th world series in a 5-game romp over outclassed Cincinnati, crushing the Reds in a humiliating 13-5 barrage Monday in the loosely played finale.

With Mickey Mantle and Yogi Berra both out of action due to injuries, the American League champs still mounted a 15-hit attack against a parade of eight Cincinnati pitchers, the most ever used by one team in a series game.

Johnny Blanchard, Mantle's replacement, slammed a 2-run homer as the Yankees routed loser Joey Jay in a 5-run first inning.

Hector Lopez, subbing for Berra, smashed a 3-run homer off Bill Henry during another 5-run explosion in the fourth.

The Yanks also took advantage of three Cincinnati errors.

The crowd of 32,589 had only two chances to applaud.

In the third Frank Robinson hammered a long home run deep into the corner of the bleachers in right center, about 400 feet away, with two men on.

Momentarily the Reds were back in the ball game, trailing only 6-3, but the drive fizzled when John Edwards fouled out with men on second and third and two out.

In the fifth, Wally Post slashed a 2-run homer off Bud Daley, but by that time the score was 11-5 and it really didn't matter.

The Yankee triumph made Ralph Houk only the third man to lead a team to both a pennant and a World Series victory in his first year as a manager.

Only Bucky Harris, the `` boy-manager '' of Washington in 1924, and Eddie Dyer of the St. Louis Cardinals in 1946 had accomplished the feat.

Philadelphia, Jan. 23

-- Nick Skorich, the line coach for the football champion Philadelphia Eagles, was elevated today to head coach.

Skorich received a three-year contract at a salary believed to be between $20,000 and $25,000 a year.

He succeeds Buck Shaw, who retired at the end of last season.

The appointment was announced at a news conference at which Skorich said he would retain two members of Shaw's staff -- Jerry Williams and Charlie Gauer.

Williams is a defensive coach.

Gauer works with the ends.

Choice was expected

The selection had been expected.

Skorich was considered the logical choice after the club gave Norm Van Brocklin permission to seek the head coaching job with the Minnesota Vikings, the newest National Football League entry.

Van Brocklin, the quarterback who led the Eagles to the title, was signed by the Vikings last Wednesday.

Philadelphia permitted him to seek a better connection after he had refused to reconsider his decision to end his career as a player.

With Skorich at the helm, the Eagles are expected to put more emphasis on running, rather than passing.

In the past the club depended largely on Van Brocklin's aerials.

Skorich, however, is a strong advocate of a balanced attack -- split between running and passing.

Coach played 3 years

Skorich, who is 39 years old, played football at Cincinnati University and then had a three-year professional career as a lineman under Jock Sutherland with the Pittsburgh Steelers.

An injury forced Skorich to quit after the 1948 season.

He began his coaching career at Pittsburgh Central Catholic High School in 1949.

He remained there for four years before moving to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N. Y..

He was there one season before rejoining the Steelers as an assistant coach.

Four years later he resigned to take a similar job with the Green Bay Packers.

The Eagles signed him for Shaw's staff in 1959.

Skorich began his new job auspiciously today.

At a ceremony in the reception room of Mayor Richardson Dilworth, the Eagles were honored for winning the championship.

Shaw and Skorich headed a group of players, coaches and team officials who received an engrossed copy of an official city citation and a pair of silver cufflinks shaped like a football.

With the announcement of a `` special achievement award '' to William A.(( Bill) Shea, the awards list was completed yesterday for Sunday night's thirty-eighth annual dinner and show of the New York Chapter, Baseball Writers' Association of America, at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

Shea, the chairman of Mayor Wagner's Baseball Committee, will be joined on the dais by Warren Spahn, the southpaw pitching ace of the Milwaukee Braves;;

Frank Graham, the Journal-American sports columnist;;

Bill Mazeroski, the World Series hero of the Pittsburgh Pirates, and Casey Stengel, the former manager of the Yankees.

Stengel will receive the Ben Epstein Good Guy Award.

Mazeroski, whose homer beat the Yankees in the final series game, will receive the Babe Ruth Award as the outstanding player in the 1960 world series.

Graham will be recognized for his meritorious service to baseball and will get the William J. Slocum Memorial Award.

To Spahn will go the Sid Mercer Memorial Award as the chapter's player of the year.

Show follows ceremonies

A crowd of 1,400 is expected for the ceremonies, which will be followed by the show in which the writers will lampoon baseball personalities in skit, dance and song.

The 53-year-old Shea, a prominent corporation lawyer with a sports background, is generally recognized as the man most responsible for the imminent return of a National League club to New York.

Named by Mayor Wagner three years ago to head a committee that included James A. Farley, Bernard Gimbel and Clint Blume, Shea worked relentlessly.

His goal was to obtain a National League team for this city.

The departure of the Giants and the Dodgers to California left New York with only the Yankees.

Despite countless barriers and disappointments, Shea moved forward.

When he was unable to bring about immediate expansion, he sought to convince another National League club to move here.

When that failed, he enlisted Branch Rickey's aid in the formation of a third major league, the Continental, with New York as the key franchise.

The Continental League never got off the ground, but after two years it forced the existing majors to expand.

Flushing stadium in works

The New York franchise is headed by Mrs. Charles Shipman Payson.

A big-league municipal stadium at Flushing Meadow Park is in the works, and once the lease is signed the local club will be formally recognized by Commissioner Ford C. Frick.

Shea's efforts figure prominently in the new stadium.

Shea and his wife, Nori, make their home at Sands Point, L. I..

Bill Jr., 20, Kathy, 15, and Patricia, 9, round out the Shea family.

Shea was born in Manhattan.

He attended New York University before switching to Georgetown University in Washington.

He played basketball there while working toward a law degree.

Later, Shea owned and operated the Long Island Indians, a minor league professional football team.

He was the lawyer for Ted Collins' old Boston Yankees in the National Football League.

All was quiet in the office of the Yankees and the local National Leaguers yesterday.

On Friday, Roger Maris, the Yankee outfielder and winner of the American League's most-valuable-player award, will meet with Roy Hamey, the general manager.

Maris is in line for a big raise.

Arnold Palmer and Sam Snead will be among those honored at the national awards dinner of the Metropolitan Golf Writers Association tonight.

The dinner will be held at the Hotel Pierre.

Palmer, golf's leading money-winner in 1960, and Snead will be saluted as the winning team in the Canada Cup matches last June in Dublin.

Deane Beman, the National Amateur champion, and all the metropolitan district champions, including Bob Gardner, the amateur title-holder, also will receive awards.

The writers' Gold Tee Award will go to John McAuliffe of Plainfield, N. J., and Palm Beach, Fla., for his sponsorship of charity tournaments.

Horton Smith of Detroit, a former president of the Professional Golfers Association, will receive the Ben Hogan Trophy for his comeback following a recent illness.

The principal speaker will be Senator Stuart Symington, Democrat of Missouri.

Golf's golden boy

Arnold Palmer has been a blazing figure in golf over the past twelve months.

He won the Masters, the United States Open and a record $80,738 in prize money.

He was heralded as `` Sportsman of the Year '' by Sports Illustrated, and last night was acclaimed in Rochester as the `` Professional Athlete of the Year '', a distinction that earned for him the $10,000 diamond-studded Hickok Belt.

But he also achieved something that endeared him to every duffer who ever flubbed a shot.

A couple of weeks ago, he scored a monstrous 12 on a par-5 hole.

It made him human.

And it also stayed the hands of thousands of brooding incompetents who were meditating the abandonment of a sport whose frustrations were driving them to despair.

If such a paragon of perfection as Palmer could commit such a scoring sacrilege, there was hope left for all.

It was neither a spirit of self-sacrifice nor a yen to encourage the downtrodden that motivated Arnold.

He merely became victimized by a form of athletics that respects no one and aggravates all.

The world's best golfer, shooting below par, came to the last hole of the opening round of the Los Angeles open with every intention of delivering a final crusher.

He boomed a 280-yard drive.

Then the pixies and the zombies took over while the banshees wailed in the distance.

No margin for error

On the narrow fairway of a 508-yard hole, Arnold whipped into his second shot.

The ball went off in a majestic arc, an out-of-bounds slice.

He tried again and once more sliced out of bounds.

He hooked the next two out of bounds on the opposite side.

`` It is possible that I over-corrected '', he said ruefully.

Each of the four wayward shots cost him two strokes.

So he wound up with a dozen.

`` It was a nice round figure, that 12 '', he said as he headed for the clubhouse, not too much perturbed.

From the standpoint of the army of duffers, however, this was easily the most heartening exhibition they had had since Ben Hogan fell upon evil ways during his heyday and scored an 11 in the Texas open.

The idol of the hackers, of course, is Ray Ainsley, who achieved a 19 in the United States Open.

Their secondary hero is another pro, Willie Chisholm, who drank his lunch during another Open and tried to blast his way out of a rock-strewn gully.

Willie's partner was Long Jim Barnes, who tried to keep count.

Stickler for rules

`` How many is that, Jim ''??

Asked Willie at one stage of his excavation project.

`` Thirteen '', said Long Jim.

`` Nae, man '', said Willie, `` ye must be countin' the echoes ''.

He had a 16.

Palmer's dozen were honestly earned.

Nor were there any rules to save him.

If there had been, he would have found a loophole, because Arnold is one golfer who knows the code as thoroughly as the man who wrote the book.

This knowledge has come in handy, too.

His first shot in the Open last year landed in a brook that flowed along the right side of the fairway.

The ball floated downstream.

A spectator picked up the ball and handed it to a small boy, who dropped this suddenly hot potato in a very playable lie.

Arnold sent for Joe Dey, the executive secretary of the golf association.

Joe naturally ruled that a ball be dropped from alongside the spot where it had originally entered the stream.

`` I knew it all along '', confessed Arnold with a grin, `` but I just happened to think how much nicer it would be to drop one way up there ''.

For a serious young man who plays golf with a serious intensity, Palmer has such an inherent sense of humor that it relieves the strain and keeps his nerves from jangling like banjo strings.

Yet he remains the fiercest of competitors.

He'll even bull head-on into the rules when he is sure he's right.

That's how he first won the Masters in 1958.

It happened on the twelfth hole, a 155-yarder.

Arnold's iron shot from the tee burrowed into the bunker guarding the green, an embankment that had become soft and spongy from the rains, thereby bringing local rules into force.

Ruling from on high

`` I can remove the ball, can't I ''??

Asked Palmer of an official.

`` No '', said the official.

`` You must play it where it lies ''.

`` You're wrong '', said Arnold, a man who knows the rules.

`` I'll do as you say, but I'll also play a provisional ball and get a ruling ''.

He scored a 4 for the embedded ball, a 3 with the provisional one.

The golfing fathers ruled in his favor.

So he picked up a stroke with the provisional ball and won the tournament by the margin of that stroke.

Until a few weeks ago, however, Arnold Palmer was some god-like creature who had nothing in common with the duffers.

But after that 12 at Los Angeles he became one of the boys, a bigger hero than he ever had been before.

A formula to supply players for the new Minneapolis Vikings and the problem of increasing the 1961 schedule to fourteen games will be discussed by National Football League owners at a meeting at the Hotel Warwick today.

Other items on the agenda during the meetings, which are expected to continue through Saturday, concern television, rules changes, professional football's hall of fame, players' benefits and constitutional amendments.

The owners would like each club in the fourteen-team league to play a home-and-home series with teams in its division, plus two games against teams in the other division.

However, this would require a lengthening of the season from thirteen to fourteen weeks.

Pete Rozelle, the league commissioner, pointed out:

`` We'll have the problem of baseball at one end and weather at the other ''.

Nine of the league's teams play in baseball parks and therefore face an early-season conflict in dates.

If the Cardinals heed Manager Gene Mauch of the Phillies, they won't be misled by the Pirates' slower start this season.

`` Pittsburgh definitely is the team to beat '', Mauch said here the other day.

`` The Pirates showed they could outclass the field last year.

They have the same men, no age problem, no injuries and they also have Vinegar Bend Mizell for the full season, along with Bobby Shantz ''.

Tonight at 8 o'clock the Cardinals, who gave the Pirates as much trouble as anyone did in 1960, breaking even with them, will get their first 1961 shot at baseball's world champions.

The Pirates have a 9-6 record this year and the Redbirds are 7-9.

Change in pitchers.

Solly Hemus announced a switch in his starting pitcher, from Bob Gibson to Ernie Broglio, for several reasons: 1 Broglio's 4-0 won-lost record and 1.24 earned-run mark against Pittsburgh a year ago;;

2 The desire to give Broglio as many starts as possible;;

3 The Redbirds' disheartening 11-7 collapse against the Phillies Sunday.

Manager Hemus, eager to end a pitching slump that has brought four losses in the five games on the current home stand, moved Gibson to the Wednesday night starting assignment.

After Thursday's open date, Solly plans to open with Larry Jackson against the Cubs here Friday night.

Harvey Haddix, set back by the flu this season, will start against his former Cardinal mates, who might be playing without captain Kenny Boyer in tonight's game at Busch Stadium.

Boyer is suffering from a stiff neck.

Haddix has a 13-8 record against the Redbirds, despite only a 1-3 mark in 1960.

Pirate Manager Danny Murtaugh said he hadn't decided between Mizell and Vern Law for Wednesday's game.

Mizell has won both of his starts.

Nieman kept in lineup.

After a lengthy workout yesterday, an open date, Hemus said that Bob Nieman definitely would stay in the lineup.

That means Stan Musial probably will ride the bench on the seventh anniversary of his record five-home run day against the Giants.

`` I have to stay with Nieman for a while '', Hemus said.

`` Bill White( sore ankles) should be ready.

With a lefthander going for Pittsburgh, I may use Don Taussig in center ''.

`` Lindy McDaniel threw batting practice about 25 minutes, and he looked good '', Hemus said.

`` He should be getting back in the groove before long.

Our pitching is much better than it has shown ''.

The statistics hardly indicated that the Pirates needed extra batting practice, but Murtaugh also turned his men loose at Busch Stadium yesterday.

Six Bucks over.

Until the Bucs' bats quieted down a bit in Cincinnati over the weekend, the champions had eight men hitting over.

Despite the recession, Pittsburgh came into town with this imposing list of averages: Smoky Burgess, Gino Cimoli, Bill Virdon, Bob Clemente and Dick Groat, each

, Dick Stuart, Don Hoak

and Bob Skinner

.

Bill Mazeroski with and Hal Smith with were the only Pirates dragging their feet.

Perhaps the Pirate who will be the unhappiest over the news that Musial probably will sit out most of the series is Bob Friend, who was beaten by The Man twice last season on dramatic home runs.

Friend is off to a great start with a 4-0 record but isn't likely to see action here this week.

`` We're getting Friend some runs for a change, and he has been pitching good '', Murtaugh said.

`` Virdon has been blasting the ball.

No plunkers for him ''.

Six Bucs over.

The Pirates jumped off to an 11-3 start by May 1 last year, when the Redbirds as well as the Dodgers held them even over the season.

On last May 1, the Cardinals stood at 7-6, ending a two-season fall-off on that milestone.

In 1958, the Birds were 3-10 on May 1.

A year later they were 4-13.

Since 1949, the St. Louis club has been below on May 1 just four times.

The '49 team was off to a so-so 5-5 beginning, then fell as low as 12-17 on May 23 before finishing with 96 victories.

The '52 Cards were 6-7 on May 1 but ended with 88 triumphs, the club's top since 1949.

Then last season the Birds tumbled as low as 11-18 on May 19 before recovering to make a race of it and total 86 victories.

Since 1949, the only National League club that got off to a hot start and made a runaway of the race was the '55 Dodger team.

Those Dodgers won their first 10 games and owned a 21-2 mark and a nine-game lead by May 8.

The club that overcame the worst start in a comparable period to win the pennant was New York's '51 Giants, who dropped 11 of their first 13.

They honored the battling Billikens last night.

Speakers at a Tipoff Club dinner dealt lavish praise to a group of St. Louis University players who, in the words of Coach John Benington, `` had more confidence in themselves than I did ''.

The most valuable player award was split three ways, among Glen Mankowski, Gordon Hartweger and Tom Kieffer.

In addition, a special award was given to Bob( Bevo) Nordmann, the 6-foot-10 center who missed much of the season because of a knee injury.

`` You often hear people talk about team spirit and that sort of thing '', Benington said in a conversation after the ceremonies, `` but what this team had was a little different.

The boys had a tremendous respect for each other's ability.

They knew what they could do and it was often a little more than I thought they could do.

`` Several times I found the players pepping me up, where it usually is the coach who is supposed to deliver the fight talk.

We'd be losing at halftime to a good team and Hartweger would say,' Don't worry, Coach -- we'll get 'em all right' ''.

The trio who shared the most-valuable honors were introduced by Bob Broeg, sports editor of the Post-Dispatch.

Kieffer, the only junior in the group, was commended for his ability to hit in the clutch, as well as his all-round excellent play.

Mankowski, the ball-hawking defensive expert, was cited for his performance against Bradley in St. Louis U.'s nationally televised victory.

Benington said, `` I've never seen a player have a game as great as Mankowski did against Bradley that day ''.

Benington recalled that he once told Hartweger that he doubted Gordon would ever play much for him because he seemed to be lacking in all of the accepted basketball skills.

After the coach listed all the boy's faults, Hartweger said, `` Coach before I leave here, you'll get to like me ''.

Mrs. Benington admired Gordon's spirit and did what she could to persuade her husband that the boy might help the team.

As Hartweger accepted his silver bowl, he said, `` I want to thank coach's wife for talking him into letting me play ''.

Bob Burnes, sports editor of the Globe-Democrat, presented Bob Nordmann with his award.

Bevo was congratulated for his efforts to stay in shape so that he could help the team if his knee healed in time.

Within a week after the injury, suffered in St. Louis's victory in the final game of the Kentucky tournament, Nordmann was sitting on the Bill's bench doing what he could to help Benington.

On the clock given him was the inscription, `` For Outstanding Contribution to Billiken Basketball, 1960-61 ''.

Other lettermen from the team that compiled a 21-9 record and finished as runner-up in the National Invitation Tournament were: Art Hambric, Donnell Reid, Bill Nordmann, Dave Harris, Dave Luechtefeld and George Latinovich.

`` This team set a precedent that could be valuable in the future '', Benington pointed out.

`` By winning against Bradley, Kentucky and Notre Dame on those teams' home courts, they showed that the home court advantage can be overcome anywhere and that it doesn't take a super team to do it ''.

St. Louis University found a way to win a baseball game.

Larry Scherer last night pitched a no-hit game, said to be the first in Billiken baseball history, as the Blue and White beat Southeast Missouri State College, 5-1, at Crystal City.

The victory was the first of the season for the Billikens after nine defeats and a tie.

The tie was against Southeast Missouri last Friday.

Scherer also had a big night at bat with four hits in five trips including a double, Len Boehmer also was 4-for-5 with two doubles and Dave Ritchie had a home run and a triple.

St. Louis U. was to be in action again today with a game scheduled at 4 against Washington University at Ligget Field.

The game opened a busy week for Washington.

The Bears are set to play at Harris Teachers College at 3:30 tomorrow and have a doubleheader at Quincy, Ill., Saturday.

Happy hitting

If it's true that contented cows give more milk, why shouldn't happy ball players produce more base hits??

The two top talents of the time, Mickey Mantle and Willie Mays, have hit the ball harder and more successfully so far this early season than at any period in careers which, to be frank about it, never have quite reached expectations.

And that's meant as a boost, not a knock.

Mays and Mantle, both 10-year men at 30, have so much ability that, baseball men agree, they've never hit the heights.

Their heights, that is.

Mantle, the bull-necked blond switch-hitter, had one sensational triple-crown season, 1959, when he batted and also led the American League in home runs, 52, and rbi's, 130.

Like the Yankees' slugger, Mays, the terror of the Giants, has had seasons that would be considered the ultimate by most players, but not by -- or for -- Willie.

His best years were 1954 when he hit with 41 homers and '55 when he belted 51 home runs, drove in 127 and stole 24 bases.

Now, apparently happier under new managers, Mays and Mantle, the perfect players, are behaving as though they're going to pass those previous peaks.

Labor relations

Yes, we know, they're professionals, men paid to play, and they shouldn't care how they're handled, just as long as their names are spelled correctly on the first and fifteenth of each month.

The truth is, though, that men react differently to different treatment.

For that matter, Stan Musial is rare, possessing the disposition that enabled him to put out the same for seven managers, reserving his opinions, but not his effort.

Mantle, it's apparent, resented Casey Stengel's attempts to push and prod him into the perfection the veteran manager saw as a thrilling possibility.

The old man was almost too possessive.

Stengel inherited DiMaggio, Rizzuto, but he brought up Mantle from Class C to the majors, from Joplin to New York.

With the speed and power of the body beautiful he saw before him, Ol' Case wanted No. 7 to be not only the best homerun hitter, but also the best bunter, base-runner and outfielder.

Stengel probably preached too much in the early days when the kid wanted to pop his bubble gum and sow his oats.

Inheriting a more mature Mantle, who now has seen the sights on and off Broadway, Ralph Houk quietly bestowed, no pun intended, the mantle of authority on Mickey.

The Major decided that, rather than be led, the slugger could lead.

And what leadership a proud Mantle has given so far.

The opinion continues here that with a 162-game schedule, pitching spread thin through a 10-team league and a most inviting target in Los Angeles' Wrigley Field Jr., Mantle just might break the most glamorous record on the books, Babe Ruth's 60 homers of 1927.

Four for Alvin

Mays' day came a day earlier for Willie than for the kids and Commies this year.

Willie's wonderful walloping Sunday -- four home runs -- served merely to emphasize how happy he is to be playing for Alvin Dark.

Next to Leo Durocher, Dark taught Mays the most when he was a grass-green rookie rushed up to the Polo Grounds 10 years ago this month, to help the Giants win a dramatic pennant.

Romantic news concerns Mrs. Joan Monroe Armour and F. Lee H. Wendell, who are to be married at 4:30 p.m. tomorrow in the Lake Forest home of her brother, J. Hampton Monroe, and Mrs. Monroe.

Only the families and a dozen close friends will be present.

The bride's brother, Walter D. Monroe Jr., will give her in marriage.

In the small group will be the junior and senior Mrs. Walter Monroe;;

the bridegroom's parents, the Barrett Wendells, who are returning from a winter holiday in Sarasota, Fla., for the occasion;;

and his brother, Mr. Wendell Jr., and his wife, who will arrive from Boston.

Mr. Wendell Jr. will be best man.

Also present will be the bride's children, Joan, 13, and Kirkland, 11.

Their father is Charles B. Armour.

The bridegroom's children were here for the Christmas holidays and can't return.

Young Peter Wendell, a student at the Westminster school, has measles, and his sister, Mrs. Andrew Thomas, and her husband, who live in Missoula, Mont., have a new baby.

Their mother is Mrs. Camilla Alsop Wendell.

Mr. Wendell and his bride will live in his Lake Forest house.

They will take a wedding trip later.

' back with the Met

`` We are back with the' Met' again now that the' Met' is back in Chicago '', bulletins Mrs. Frank S. Sims, president of the women's board of the University of Chicago Cancer Research Foundation.

The New York Metropolitan Opera Company will be here in May, and the board will sponsor the Saturday night, May 13, performance of `` Turandot '' as a benefit.

Birgit Nilsson will be starred.

`` Housed in the new McCormick Place theater, this should prove to be an exciting evening '', adds Mrs. Sims.

The board's last money raising event was a performance by Harry Belafonte -- `` quite off-beat for this group '', decided some of the members.

Mrs. Henry T. Sulcer of Winnetka, a new board member, will be chairman of publicity for the benefit.

Her husband recently was appointed vice president of the university, bringing them back here from the east.

Parichy-Hamm

Because of the recent death of the bride's father, Frederick B. Hamm, the marriage of Miss Terry Hamm to John Bruce Parichy will be a small one at noon tomorrow in St. Bernadine's church, Forest Park.

A small reception will follow in the Oak Park Arms hotel.

Mrs. Hamm will not come from Vero Beach, Fla., for the wedding.

However, Mr. Parichy and his bride will go to Vero Beach on their wedding trip, and will stay in the John G. Beadles' beach house.

The Beadles formerly lived in Lake Forest.

Harvey B. Stevens of Kenilworth will give his niece in marriage.

Mr. and Mrs. Stevens and the bride's other uncles and aunts, the Rush C. Butlers, the Homer E. Robertsons, and the David Q. Porters, will give the bridal dinner tonight in the Stevenses' home.

Here and there

The Chicago Press club will fete George E. Barnes, president of the United States Lawn Tennis association, at a cocktail party and buffet supper beginning at 5:30 p.m. tomorrow.

Later, a bus will carry members to the Chicago Stadium to see Jack Kramer's professional tennis matches at 8 p.m..

With loud huzzahs for the artistic success of the Presbyterian-St. Luke's Fashion show still ringing in her ears, its director, Helen Tieken Geraghty( Mrs. Maurice P. Geraghty) is taking off tomorrow on a 56 day world trip which should earn her even greater acclaim as director of entertainment for next summer's International Trade fair.

Armed with letters from embassies to ministers of countries, especially those in the near and far east, Mrs. Geraghty `` will beat the bushes for oriental talent ''.

`` We( the Chicago Association of Commerce and Industry) expect to establish closer relations with nations and their cultural activities, and it will be easy as a member of the fair staff to bring in acts '', explains Mrs. Geraghty.

`` For instance, Djakarta, Indonesia, has three groups of dancers interested in coming here.

I'm even going to try to get the whirling dervishes of Damascus ''!!

The last obstacle in Mrs. Geraghty's globe-girdling trip was smoothed out when a representative of Syria called upon her to explain that his brother would meet her at the border of that country -- so newly separated from Egypt and the United Arab Republic that she hadn't been able to obtain a visa.

First, Honolulu

Honolulu will be Mrs. Geraghty's first stop.

Then Japan, Hong Kong, Manila, India, Pakistan, Damascus, Beirut, and to Rome, London, and Paris `` to look over wonderful talent ''.

Dec. 22 is the deadline for Mrs. Geraghty's return;;

the Geraghtys' youngest daughter, Molly, bows in the Passavant Debutante Cotillion the next night.

Molly already has her cotillion gown, and it's fitted, says her mother.

Also, invitations have been addressed to Molly's debut tea the afternoon of Dec. 29 in the Arts club.

It won't be a `` tea '', however, but more of an international folk song festival, with singers from Chicago's foreign groups to sing Christmas songs from around the world.

The international theme will be continued with the Balkan strings playing for a dinner the Byron Harveys will give in the Racquet club after the tea.

Miss Abra Prentice's debut supper dance in the Casino will wind up the day.

Burke-Rostagno

The Richard S. Burkes' home in Wayne may be the setting for the wedding reception for their daughter, Helen Lambert, and the young Italian she met last year while studying in Florence during her junior year at Smith college.

He is Aldo Rostagno, son of the Guglielmo Rostagnos of Florence whom the Burkes met last year in Europe.

The Burkes, who now live in Kankakee, are telling friends of the engagement.

Miss Burke, a graduate of Miss Hall's school, stayed on in Florence as a career girl.

Her fiance, who is with a publishing firm, translates many books from English into Italian.

He will be coming here on business in December, when the wedding is to take place in Wayne.

Miss Burke will arrive in December also.

Here and there

A farewell supper Mr. and Mrs. Charles H. Sethness Jr. planned Sunday for Italian Consul General and Mrs. Giacomo Profili has been canceled because Mr. Sethness is in Illinois Masonic hospital for surgery.

Mrs. William Odell, Mrs. Clinton B. King, John Holabird Jr., Norman Boothby, and Actress Maureen O'Sullivan will judge the costumes in the grand march at the Affaire Old Towne Bal Masque tomorrow in the Germania club.

The party is to raise money for the Old Town Art center and to plant more crabapple trees along the streets of Old Town.

Lyon around: Columnist Walter Winchell, well and rat-a-tat-tatty again, wheeled thru town between trains yesterday en route to his Phoenix, Ariz., rancho, portable typewriter in hand.

If W. W.'s retiring soon, as hinted, he ain't talking -- yet.

Pretty Sunny Ainsworth, the ex-Mrs. Tommy Manville and the ex-Mrs. Bud Arvey, joined Playboy-Show-Biz Illustrated, as a promotional copy writer.

She's a whiz.

You can get into an argument about fallout shelters at the drop of a beer stein in clubs and pubs these nights.

Everybody has a different idea on the ethics and morals of driving away neighbors, when and if.

Comic Gary Morton signed to play the Living Room here Dec. 18, because that's the only time his heart, Lucille Ball, can come along.

And watch for a headline from this pair any time now.

The Living Room has another scoop: Jane Russell will make one of her rare night club singing appearances there, opening Jan. 22.

La Russell's run in `` Skylark '', debuting next week at Drury Lane, already is a sellout.

Johnny Ray, at the same L. R., has something to cry about.

He's been warbling in severe pain;;

a medico's injection inflamed a nerve, and Johnny can barely walk.

Charley Simonelli, top Universal-International film studio exec, makes an honest man out of this column.

As we bulletin'd way back, he'll wed pretty Rosemary Strafaci, of the Golf Mag staff, in N. Y. C. today.

Handsome bachelor Charley was a favorite date of many of Hollywood's glamor gals for years.

George Simon, exec director of Danny Thomas A. L. S. A. C.( Aiding Leukemia Stricken American Children) fund raising group, filled me in on the low-down phonies who are using phones to solicit funds for Danny's St. Jude hospital in Memphis.

There is no such thing as an `` emergency telephone building fund drive ''.

The only current event they're staging is the big show at the Stadium Nov. 25, when Danny will entertain thousands of underprivileged kids.

You can mail contribs to Danny Thomas, Post Office Box 7599, Chicago.

So, if anybody solicits by phone, make sure you mail the dough to the above.

Olivia De Havilland signed to do a Broadway play for Garson Kanin this season, `` A Gift of Time ''.

She'll move to Gotham after years in Paris.

Gorgeous Doris Day and her producer-hubby, Marty Melcher, drive in today from a motor tour thru New England.

D. D. will pop up with U-I Chief Milt Rackmil at the Carnegie theater tomorrow to toast 300 movie exhibitors.

It'll be an all day affair with screenings of Doris' new one, `` Lover Come Back '', and `` Flower Drum Song ''.

Whee the People: Lovely Thrush Annamorena gave up a promising show biz career to apply glamor touches to her hubby, Ray Lenobel's fur firm here.

Typical touch: She sold a $10,000 morning light mink to Sportsman Freddie Wacker for his frau, Jana Mason, also an ex-singer.

In honor of the Wackers' new baby.

Fur goodness sake!!

Emcee Jack Herbert insists Dick Nixon's campaign slogan for governor of California is, `` Knight Must Fall ''!!

Give generously when you buy candy today for the Brain Research Foundation.

It's one of our town's worthiest charities.

Best Bet for Tonight: That darlin' dazzler from Paree, Genevieve, opening in the Empire room.

Dave Trager, who is quite a showman and boss of Chicago's new pro basketball Packers, is debuting a new International club, for the exclusive use of season ticket holders, in the Stock Yards Inn.

Jump off is tomorrow night when the Packs meet St. Louis in their season home opener.

Nobody's mentioned it, but when ol' Casey Stengel takes over as boss of the New York Mets, he'll be the only baseballight ever to wear the uniform of all New York area clubs, past and present: Yankees, Dodgers, Giants, and now the Mets.

And Bernie Kriss calls the bayonet clashes at Berlin's Brandenburg Gate, `` The Battle of the Sentry ''!!

The jotted Lyon: This mad world dept.: Khrush and the Kremlin crowd are confident all right.

They're contaminating the earth's atmosphere including their own via mighty megaton bombs but their own peasants still don't know about it!!

More: On the free world side.

Albert John Luthuli, awarded a Nobel prize for his South African integration struggles, has to get permission to fly to collect his honor.

Hmpf But on to the frothier side Johnny Weissmuller, the only real Tarzan, telephoned Maureen O'Sullivan, his first `` Jane ''( now at Drury Lane) and muttered, `` Me Tarzan, this Jane ''??

Snapped Maureen, `` Me Jane ''!!

Actually Johnny is a glib, garrulous guy, with a rare sense of humor.

Everywhere he went in town, people sidled up, gave him the guttural bit or broke into a frightening Tarzan yodel.

He kids his Tarzan roles more than anyone.

`` La Dolce Vita '', the dynamite Italian flicker, opens at popular prices at the Loop theater Nov. 2.

My idea of masterful movie making.

Bill Veeck's health is back to the dynamo stage, but his medics insist he rest for several more months before getting back into the baseball swim.

William keeps up with our town's doings daily, via the Tribune, and he tells me he never misses the Ticker.

That's our boy Bill.

Jean Fardulli's Blue Angel is the first top local club to import that crazy new dance, the Twist.

They'll start lessons, too, pronto.

A cheer here for Francis Lorenz, state treasurer, who will meet with the probate advisory board of the Chicago Bar association, for suggestions on how to handle the opening of safety deposit boxes after somebody dies.

After being closed for seven months, the Garden of the Gods Club will have its gala summer opening Saturday, June 3.

Music for dancing will be furnished by Allen Uhles and his orchestra, who will play each Saturday during June.

Members and guests will be in for an added surprise with the new wing containing 40 rooms and suites, each with its own private patio.

Gene Marshall, genial manager of the club, has announced that the Garden of the Gods will open to members Thursday, June 1.

Beginning July 4, there will be an orchestra playing nightly except Sunday and Monday for the summer season.

Mrs. J. Edward Hackstaff and Mrs. Paul Luette are planning a luncheon next week in honor of Mrs. J. Clinton Bowman, who celebrates her birthday on Tuesday.

Mr. and Mrs. Jerry Chase announce the birth of a daughter, Sheila, on Wednesday in Mercy Hospital.

Grandparents are Mr. and Mrs. Robert L. Chase and Mr. and Mrs. Guy Mullenax of Kittredge.

Mrs. Chase is the former Miss Mary Mullenax.

Back to w. coast

Mrs. McIntosh Buell will leave Sunday to return to her home in Santa Barbara, Calif., after spending a week in her Polo Grounds home.

Mrs. John C. Vroman Jr. of Manzanola is spending several days in her Sherman Plaza apartment.

Mr. and Mrs. Merrill Shoup have returned to their home in Colorado Springs after spending a few days at the Brown Palace Hotel.

Brig. Gen. and Mrs. Robert F. McDermott will entertain at a black tie dinner Wednesday, May 3, in the Officers' Club at the Air Force Academy.

Cocktail party

Mr. and Mrs. Piero De Luise will honor Italian Consul and Mrs. Emilio Bassi at a cocktail party Tuesday, May 2, from 6 to 8 p.m. in their home.

The Bassis are leaving soon for their new post.

There will be a stag dinner Friday evening at the Denver Country Club which will precede the opening of the 1961 golf season.

Cocktails will be served from 6 to 7 p.m., with dinner at 7 and entertainment in the main dining room immediately following.

Miss Betsy Parker was one of the speakers on the panel of the Eastern Women's Liberal Arts College panel on Wednesday evening in the Security Life Bldg..

Guests were juniors in the public high schools.

Fashion show

The committee for the annual Central City fashion show has been announced by Mrs. D. W. Moore, chairman.

The event, staged yearly by Neusteters, will be held in the Opera House Wednesday, Aug. 16.

It will be preceded by luncheon in the Teter House.

Mrs. Roger Mead is head of the luncheon table decorations.

Mrs. Stanley Wright is ticket chairman and Mrs. Theodore Pate is in charge of publicity.

Members of the committee include Mrs. Milton Bernet, Mrs. J. Clinton Bowman, Mrs. Rollie W. Bradford, Mrs. Samuel Butler Jr., Mrs. Donald Carr Campbell, Mrs. Douglas Carruthers, Mrs. John C. Davis 3,, Mrs. Cris Dobbins, Mrs. William E. Glass, Mrs. Alfred Hicks 2,, Mrs. Donald Magarrell, Mrs. Willett Moore, Mrs. Myron Neusteter, Mrs. Richard Gibson Smith, Mrs. James S. Sudier 2, and Mrs. Thomas Welborn.

The first committee meeting will be held on May 19.

Mr. and Mrs. Andrew S. Kelsey of Washington, D.C., announce the birth of a daughter, Kira Ann Kelsey, on Monday in Washington, D.C..

Grandparents are Mr. and Mrs. R.L. Rickenbaugh and Mr. and Mrs. E.O. Kelsey of Scarsdale, N.Y..

Mrs. Kelsey is the former Miss Ann Rickenbaugh.

A cheery smile, a compassionate interest in others and a practical down-to-earth approach.

Those qualities make Esther Marr a popular asset at the Salvation Army's Social Center at 1200 Larimer St..

The pert, gray-haired woman who came to Denver three years ago from Buffalo, N.Y., is a `` civilian '' with the Army.

Her position covers a number of daily tasks common to any social director.

The job also covers a number of other items.

`` Mom '' Marr, as the more than 80 men at the center call her, is the link that helps to bridge the gulf between alcoholics and the outside world and between parolees and society.

Her day starts early, but no matter how many pressing letters there are to be written( and during May, which is National Salvation Army Week, there are plenty), schedules to be made or problems to be solved, Mrs. Marr's office is always open and the welcome mat is out.

Mrs. Marr is the first contact a Skid Row figure talks to after he decides he wants to pick himself up.

She sees that there is a cup of steaming hot coffee awaiting him and the two chat informally as she presents the rules of the center and explains procedures.

`` Usually at this point a man is withdrawn from society and one of my jobs is to see that he relearns to mingle with his fellow men '', Mrs. Marr explained.

The Denverite has worked out an entire program to achieve this using the facilities of the center.

`` And I bum tickets to everything I can '', she said.

`` I've become the greatest beggar in the world ''.

In addition to the tickets to the movies, sporting events and concerts, Mrs. Marr lines up candy and cookies because alcoholics require a lot of sweets to replace the sugar in their system.

Mrs. Marr also has a number of parolees to `` mother '', watching to see that they do not break their parole and that they also learn to readjust to society.

By mid-June, millions of Americans will take to the road on vacation trips up and down and back and forth across this vast and lovely land.

In another four weeks, with schools closed across the nation, the great all-American summer safari will be under way.

By July 1, six weeks from now, motel-keepers all over the nation will, by 6 p.m., be switching on that bleak -- to motorists -- sign, `` No Vacancy ''.

No matter how many Americans go abroad in summer, probably a hundred times as many gas up the family car, throw suitcases, kids and comic books in the back seat, and head for home.

And where is `` home '', that magic place of the heart??

Ah, that is simple.

Home is where a man was born, reared, went to school and, most particularly, where grandma is.

That is where we turn in the good old summertime.

The land lies ready for the coming onslaught.

My husband and I, a month ahead of the rush, have just finished a 7-day motor journey of 2809 miles from Tucson, Ariz., to New York City:

set for influx

I can testify that motels, service and comfort stations( they go together like Scots and heather), dog wagons, roadside restaurants, souvenir stands and snake farms are braced and waiting.

I hope it can be said without boasting that no other nation offers its vacationing motorists such variety and beauty of scene, such an excellent network of roads on which to enjoy it and such decent, far-flung over-night accommodations.

Maybe motel-keeping isn't the nation's biggest industry, but it certainly looks that way from the highway.

There are motels for all purposes and all tastes.

There are even motels for local weather peculiarities in Shamrock, Tex., as I discovered.

There the Royal Motel advertises `` all facilities, vented heat, air conditioned, carpeted, free TV, storm cellar ''.

Many with pools

Innumerable motels from Tucson to New York boast swimming pools( `` swim at your own risk '' is the hospitable sign poised at the brink of most pools).

Some even boast two pools, one for adults and one for children.

But the Royal Motel in Shamrock was the only one that offered the comfort and security of a storm cellar.

Motorists like myself who can remember the old `` tourists accommodated '' signs on farm houses and village homes before World War 2, can only marvel at the great size and the luxury of the relatively new and fast-grossing motel business.

All for $14!!

At the Boxwood Motel in Winchester, Va., we accidentally drew the honeymoon suite, an elegant affair with wall-to-wall carpeting, gold and white furniture, pink satin brocade chairs, 24-inch TV and a pink tile bath with masses of pink towels.

All for $14.

That made up for the `` best '' motel in Norman, Okla., where the proprietor knocked $2 off the $8.50 tab when we found ants in the pressed-paper furniture.

Oxnard, Calif., will be the home of the Rev. Robert D. Howard and his bride, the former Miss Judith Ellen Gay, who were married Saturday at the Munger Place Methodist Church.

Parents of the bride are Mr. and Mrs. Ferris M. Gay, 7034 Coronado.

The bridegroom is the son of Mrs. James Baines of Los Angeles, Calif., and Carl E. Howard of Santa Monica, Calif..

He is a graduate of UCLA and Perkins School of Theology, Aj.

Dr. W. B. I. Martin officiated, and the bride was given in marriage by her father.

Honor attendants for the couple were Miss Sandra Branum and Warren V. McRoberts.

The couple will honeymoon in Sequoia National Park, Calif..

Miss Joan Frances Baker, a graduate of SMU, was married Saturday to Elvis Leonard Mason, an honor graduate of Lamar State College of Technology, in the chapel of the First Presbyterian Church of Houston.

The bride, daughter of Rhodes Semmes Baker Jr. of Houston and the late Mrs. Baker, was president of Kappa Kappa Gamma and a member of Mortar Board at Aj.

Her husband, who is the son of Alton John Mason of Shreveport, La., and the late Mrs. Henry Cater Parmer, was president of Alpha Tau Omega and a member of Delta Sigma Pi at Lamar Tech, and did graduate work at Rhodes University in Grahamstown, South Africa, on a Rotary Fellowship.

The Rev. Richard Freeman of Texas City officiated and Charles Pabor and Mrs. Marvin Hand presented music.

The bride was given in marriage by her father.

She wore a court-length gown of organdy designed with bateau neckline and princesse skirt accented by lace appliques.

Her veil was caught to a crown, and she carried gardenias and stephanotis.

Miss Mary Ross of Baird was maid of honor, and bridesmaids were Miss Pat Dawson of Austin, Mrs. Howard M. Dean of Hinsdale, Ill., and Mrs. James A. Reeder of Shreveport, La..

Cecil Mason of Hartford, Conn., was best man for his brother, and groomsmen were Rhodes S. Baker 3, of Houston, Dr. James Carter of Houston and Conrad McEachern of New Orleans, La..

Lee Jackson and Ken Smith, both of Houston, and Alfred Neumann of Beaumont seated guests.

After a reception at The Mayfair, the newlyweds left for a wedding trip to New Orleans, La..

They will live in Corpus Christi.

Miss Shirley Joan Meredith, a former student of North Texas State University, was married Saturday to Larry W. Mills, who has attended Arlington State College.

They will live at 2705 Fitzhugh after a wedding trip to Corpus Christi.

Parents of the couple are Ray Meredith of Denton and the late Mrs. Meredith and Mrs. Hardy P. Mills of Floresville and the late Mr. Mills.

The Rev. Melvin Carter officiated at the ceremony in Slaughter Chapel of the First Baptist Church.

Dan Beam presented music and the bride was given in marriage by her father.

She wore a gown of satin designed along princesse lines and featuring a flared skirt and lace jacket with bateau neckline.

Her veil was caught to a pearl headdress, and she carried stephanotis and orchids.

Miss Glenda Kay Meredith of Denton was her sister's maid of honor, and Vernon Lewelleyn of San Angelo was best man.

Robert Lovelace and Cedric Burgher Jr. seated guests.

A reception was held at the church.

The First Christian Church of Pampa was the setting for the wedding last Sunday of Miss Marcile Marie Glison and Thomas Earl Loving Jr., who will live at 8861 Gaston after a wedding trip to New Orleans, La.

The bride, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Ervin Glison of Pampa, has attended Texas Woman's University and will continue her studies at Aj.

`` A Night in New Orleans '' is the gayety planned by members of the Thrift Shop Committee for May 6 at Philmont Country Club.

The women have a reputation for giving parties that are different and are fun and this year's promises to follow in this fine tradition.

Mrs. H. J. Grinsfelder is chairman.

The Louisiana city is known, of course, for its fine food, good music and its colorful hospitality `` and, when guests arrive at Philmont that night '', says Mrs. Grinsfelder, `` that is exactly what we expect to offer them.

We've been working for weeks.

The prospects look great.

We are keeping a number of surprises under our hats.

But we can't tell it all now and then have no new excitement later ''.

Basin Street Beat

But she does indicate festivities will start early, that a jazz combo will `` give with the Basin Street beat '' during the cocktail and dinner hours and that Lester Lanin's orchestra will take over during the dancing.

As for food, Mrs. Henry Louchheim, chairman of this phase, is a globetrotter who knows good food.

`` New Orleans ''??

She says, `` of course I've had the best.

It is just bad luck that we are having the party in a month with no R's, so no oysters.

But we have lots of other New Orleans specialties.

I know they will be good.

We've tried them out on the club chef -- or say, he has tried them out on us and we have selected the best ''.

Scenic effects

Guests will be treated to Gulf Coast scenic effects.

There will be masses of flowers, reproductions of the handsome old buildings with their grillwork and other things that are typical of New Orleans.

Mrs. Harry K. Cohen is chairman of this phase and she is getting an artistic assist from A. Van Hollander, display director of Gimbel Brothers.

The gala is the Thrift Shop's annual bundle party and, as all Thrift Shop friends know, that means the admission is a bundle of used clothing in good condition, contributions of household equipment, bric-a-brac and such to stock the shelves at the shop's headquarters at 1213 Walnut St..

Bundle centers

For the convenience of guests bundle centers have been established throughout the city and suburbs where the donations may be deposited between now and the date of the big event.

In addition to the bundles, guests pay the cost of their dinners.

Members of the young set who would like to come to the party only during the dancing time are welcomed.

The Thrift Shop, with Mrs. Bernhard S. Blumenthal as president, is one of the city's most successful fund-raisers for the Federation of Jewish Agencies.

Some idea of the competence of the women is indicated in the contribution made by them during the past 25 years that totals $840,000.

It's big business

`` Big business, this little Thrift Shop business '', say the members.

For most of the 25 years the operation was under feminine direction.

In the past few years the men, mostly husbands of members, have taken an interest.

Louis Glazer is chairman of the men's committee that, among other jobs, takes over part of the responsibility for staffing the shop during its evening hours.

Mrs. Theodore Kapnek is vice chairman of the committee for the gala.

Mrs. Richard Newburger is chairman of hostesses.

Mrs. Arthur Loeb is making arrangements for a reception;;

Mrs. Joan Lichtenstein, for publicity;;

Mrs. Harry M. Rose, Jr., for secretarial duties;;

Mrs. Ralph Taussig, for junior aides;;

Mr. and Mrs. B. Lewis Kaufnabb, for senior aides, and Mrs. Samuel P. Weinberg, for the bundles.

In addition, Mr. and Mrs. Allan Goodman are controllers, Mrs. Paul Stone is treasurer and Mrs. Albert Quell is in charge of admittance for the dancing at 9 P.m..

Besides the bundle centers where contributions may be made there will be facilities at Philmont Country Club for those who would like to bring the bundles on the night of the party.

The women's committee of St. David's Church will hold its annual pre-Fair pink parade, a dessert bridge and fashion show at 1 p.m. on Monday, April 17, in the chapel assembly room, Wayne.

Mrs. Robert O. Spurdle is chairman of the committee, which includes Mrs. James A. Moody, Mrs. Frank C. Wilkinson, Mrs. Ethel Coles, Mrs. Harold G. Lacy, Mrs. Albert W. Terry, Mrs. Henry M. Chance, 2d, Mrs. Robert O. Spurdle, Jr., Mrs. Harcourt N. Trimble, Jr., Mrs. John A. Moller, Mrs. Robert Zeising, Mrs. William G. Kilhour, Mrs. Hughes Cauffman, Mrs. John L. Baringer and Mrs. Clyde Newman.

The fashion show, by Natalie Collett will have Mrs. John Newbold as commentator.

Models will be Mrs. Samuel B. D. Baird, Mrs. William H. Meyle, Jr., Mrs. Richard W. Hole, Mrs. William F. Harrity, Mrs. Robert O. Spurdle, Mrs. E. H. Kloman, Mrs. Robert W. Wolcott, Jr., Mrs. Frederick C. Wheeler, Jr., Mrs. William A Boyd, Mrs F. Vernon Putt.

Col. Clifton Lisle, of Chester Springs, who headed the Troop Committee for much of its second and third decades, is now an honorary member.

Each year he invites the boys to camp out on his estate for one of their big week ends of the year.

The Troop is proud of its camping-out program -- on year-round schedule and was continued even when sub-zero temperatures were registered during the past winter.

`` We worry '', say the mothers.

`` But there never is any need.

The boys love it ''.

Mrs. John Charles Cotty is chairman of publicity for the country fair and Mrs. Francis G. Felske and Mrs. Francis Smythe, of posters.

They all are of Wayne.

`` Meet the Artist '' is the invitation issued by members of the Greater Philadelphia Section of the National Council of Jewish Women as they arrange for an annual exhibit and sale of paintings and sculpture at the Philmont Country Club on April 8 and 9.

A preview party for sponsors of the event and for the artists is set for April 8.

The event will be open to the public the following day.

Proceeds will be used by the section to further its program in science, education and social action on local, national and international levels.

Noted artist

Mrs. Monte Tyson, chairman, says the work of 100 artists well known in the Delaware Valley area will be included in the exhibition and sale.

Among them will be Marc Shoettle, Ben Shahn, Nicholas Marsicano, Alfred Van Loen and Milton Avery.

Mr. Shoettle has agreed to do a portrait of the family of the person who wins the door prize.

The event is the sixth on the annual calendar of the local members of the National Council of Jewish Women.

It originated with the Wissahickon Section.

When this and other units combined to form the present group, it was taken on as a continuing fund-raiser.

Others assisting

Mrs. Jerome Blum and Mrs. Meyer Schultz are co-chairmen this year.

Assisting as chairmen of various committees are Mrs. Alvin Blum, Mrs. Leonard Malmud, Mrs. Edward Fernberger, Mrs. Robert Cushman.

Also Mrs. Berton Korman, Mrs. Morton Rosen, Mrs. Jacques Zinman, Mrs. Evelyn Rosen, Mrs. Henry Schultz, Mr. and Mrs. I. S. Kamens, Mrs. Jack Langsdorf, Mrs. Leonard Liss, Mrs. Gordon Blumberg, Mrs. Oscar Bregman, Mrs. Alfred Kershbaum and Mrs. Edward Sabol.

Dr. and Mrs. N. Volney Ludwick have had as guests Mr. and Mrs. John J. Evans, Jr., of `` Kimbolton House '', Rockhall, Md..

Mrs. Edward App will entertain the members of her Book Club on Tuesday.

Mrs. A. Voorhees Anderson entertained at a luncheon at her home, on Monday.

Mr. and Mrs. Anderson were entertained at dinner on Sunday by Mr. and Mrs. Frank Coulson, of Fairless Hills.

Mr. and Mrs. Major Morris and their son-in-law and daughter, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Glennon, and their children will spend several days in Brigantine, N. J..

Mr. and Mrs. James Janssen announce the birth of a daughter, Patricia Lynn Janssen, on March 2.

Mr. and Mrs. Charles Marella announce the engagement of their daughter, Miss Mary Ann Marella, to Mr. Robert L. Orcutt, son of Mr. and Mrs. Donald R. Orcutt, of Drexel Hill.

Miss Eileen Grant is spending several weeks visiting in Florida.

Mr. and Mrs. Frederick Heinze are entertaining Mr. Walter Lehner, of Vienna;;

Mr. Ingo Dussa, of Dusseldorf, Germany, and Mr. Bietnar Haaek, of Brelin.

Mr. and Mrs. Harry D. Hoaps, Jr. have returned to their home in Drexel Park, after spending some time in Delray Beach Fla..

Mr. and Mrs. James F. Mitchell, with their daughter, Anne, and son, James, Jr. are spending several weeks in Florida, and will visit in Clearwater.

Cmdr. Warren Taylor, USN., and Mrs. Taylor, of E. Greenwich, R. I., will have with them for the Easter holidays the latter's parents, Mr. and Mrs. John B. Walbridge, of Drexel Hill.

Mr. and Mrs. L. DeForest Emmert, formerly of Drexel Hill, and now of Newtown Square, are entertaining Mr. and Mrs. Ashman E. Emmert, of Temple, Pa..

Mrs. William H. Merner, of Drexel Park, entertained at a luncheon at her home on Wednesday.

Mr. and Mrs. Robert Brown will return next week from Bermuda.

Mrs. H. E. Godwin will entertain the members of her Book Club at her home on Tuesday.

Dr. and Mrs. Richard Peter Vieth announce the engagement of their daughter, Miss Susan Ann Vieth, to Mr. Conrad Wall 3,, son of Dr. Conrad Wall 2,, and Mrs. Nell Kennedy Wall.

The marriage will be quietly celebrated in early February.

Miss Vieth was graduated from the Louise S. McGehee school and is attending Wellesley College in Wellesley, Mass..

Her mother is the former Miss Stella Hayward.

Mr. Wall is a student at Tulane university, where he is a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity.

Their Majesties, The Queen of Carnival and The Queen of Comus, have jointly issued invitations for Shrove Tuesday evening at midnight at which time they will entertain in the grand ballroom of a downtown hotel following the balls of Rex and Comus.

Mr. and Mrs. Richard B. McConnell and their son-in-law and daughter, Mr. and Mrs. Raymond B. Walker will be hosts this Tuesday evening at dinner at the State St. home of the Walkers honoring Mrs. McConnell's debutante niece, Miss Barbara Williams.

Debutante Miss Lady Helen Hardy will be feted at luncheon this Tuesday at which the hostess will be Mrs. Edwin Socola of Waveland, Miss..

She will entertain at a Vieux Carre restaurant at 1 o'clock in the early afternoon.

Another debutante, Miss Virginia Richmond, will also be the honoree this Wednesday at luncheon at which Mrs. John Dane, will be hostess entertaining at a downtown hotel.

Miss Katherine Vickery, who attends Sweet Briar College in Virginia, will rejoin her father, Dr. Eugene Vickery, at the family home in Richmond pl. Wednesday for part of the Carnival festivities.

When the Achaeans entertained Wednesday last at their annual Carnival masquerade ball, Miss Margaret Pierson was chosen to rule over the festivities, presented at the Muncipal Auditorium and chosen as her ladies in waiting were Misses Clayton Nairne, Eleanor Eustis, Lynn Chapman, Irwin Leatherman of Robinsonville, Miss. and Helene Rowley.

The large municipal hall was ablaze with color, which shown out from the bright array of chic ballgowns worn by those participating in the `` maskers' dances ''.

The mother of young queen, Mrs. G. Henry Pierson Jr. chose a white brocade gown made on slim lines with panels of tomato-red and bright green satin extending down the back.

Mrs. Thomas Jordan selected a black taffeta frock made with a skirt of fringed tiers and worn with crimson silk slippers.

Mrs. Clayton Nairne, whose daughter, was among the court maids, chose a deep greenish blue lace gown.

Mrs. Fenwick Eustis, whose daughter was also a maid to the queen, wore an ashes of roses slipper satin gown.

Mrs. Peter Feringa Jr., last year's Achaeans' queen, chose an eggshell white filmy lace short dress made with a wide decolletage trimmed with an edging of tulle.

Mrs. Eustis Reily's olive-green street length silk taffeta dress was embroidered on the bodice with gold threads and golden sequins and beads.

The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad announced yesterday it would reduce the total amount of its payroll by 10 per cent through salary cuts and lay-offs effective at 12:01 A.M. next Saturday.

The current monthly payroll comes to about $15,000,000.

Howard E. Simpson, the railroad's president, said, `` A drastic decline in freight loading due principally to the severe slump in the movement of heavy goods has necessitated this regrettable action ''.

The reduction in expenses will affect employees in the thirteen states in which the B.& O. operates.

Salary cut and lay-offs

It will be accomplished in two ways: 1

A flat reduction of 10 per cent in the salary of all officers, supervisors and other employees not belonging to unions.

There are about 3,325 officers and employees in this class.

2

Sufficient lay-offs of union employees to bring about a 10 per cent cut in the union payroll expense.

Since the railroad cannot reduce the salary of individual union members under contract, it must accomplish its payroll reduction by placing some of the men on furlough, a B.& O. spokesman said.

Those union members kept on their jobs, therefore, will not take a cut in their wages.

The spokesman said the number to be furloughed cannot be estimated since the lay-offs must be carried out in each area depending on what men are most needed on the job.

A thug struck a cab driver in the face with a pistol last night after robbing him of $18 at Franklin and Mount Streets.

The victim, Norman B. Wiley, 38, of the 900 block North Charles Street, was treated for cuts at Franklin Square Hospital after the robbery.

The driver told police he followed as the Negro man got out of the cab with his money.

The victim was beaten when he attempted to stop the bandit.

He said the assailant, who was armed with a automatic, entered the taxi at Pennsylvania Avenue and Gold Street.

In another attack, Samuel Verstandig, 41, proprietor of a food store in the 2100 block Aiken Street, told police two Negroes assaulted him in his store and stole $150 from the cash register after choking and beating him.

A baby was burned to death and two other children were seriously injured last night in a fire which damaged their one-room Anne Arundel county home.

The victim Darnell Somerville, Negro, 1, was pronounced dead on arrival at Anne Arundel General Hospital in Annapolis.

His sister and brother, Marie Louise, 3, and John Raymond, Jr. 22 months, were admitted to the hospital.

The girl was in critical condition with burns over 90 per cent of her body.

Boy in fair condition

The boy received second-degree burns of the face, neck and back.

His condition was reported to be fair.

Police said the children's mother, Mrs. Eleanor Somerville, was visiting next door when the fire occurred.

The house is on Old Annapolis road a mile south of Severna Park, at Jones Station, police said.

Annapolis, Jan. 7

-- The Anne Arundel county school superintendent has asked that the Board of Education return to the practice of recording its proceedings mechanically so that there will be no more question about who said what.

The proposal was made by Dr. David S. Jenkins after he and Mrs. D. Ellwood Williams, Jr., a board member and long-time critic of the superintendent, argued for about fifteen minutes at this week's meeting.

The disagreement was over what Dr. Jenkins had said at a previous session and how his remarks appeared in the minutes presented at the following meeting.

Cites discrepancies

Mrs. Williams had a list which she said contained about nine or ten discrepancies between her memory of Dr. Jenkins's conversation and how they were written up for the board's approval.

`` I hate to have these things come up again and again '', Dr. Jenkins commented as he made his suggestion.

`` These are the board's minutes.

I'll write what you tell me to ''.

For a number of years the board used a machine to keep a permanent record but abandoned the practice about two years ago.

It was about that time, a board member said later, that Dr. Thomas G. Pullen, Jr., State superintendent of schools, told Dr. Jenkins and a number of other education officials that he would not talk to them with a recording machine sitting in front of him.

The Board of County Commissioners, the Sanitary Commission, the Planning and Zoning Board and other county official bodies use recording machines for all public business in order to prevent law suits and other misunderstandings about what actually happened at their meetings.

Dr. Jenkins notes, however, that most of the school boards in the State do not do so.

State Senator Joseph A. Bertorelli( D., First Baltimore) had a stroke yesterday while in his automobile in the 200 block of West Pratt Street.

He was taken to University Hospital in a municipal ambulance.

Doctors at the hospital said he was partially paralyzed on the right side.

His condition was said to be, `` fair ''.

Police said he became ill while parked in front of a barber shop at 229 West Pratt Street.

Barber summoned

He called Vincent L. Piraro, proprietor of the shop, who summoned police and an ambulance.

The vice president of the City Council complained yesterday that there are `` deficiencies '' in the city's snow clearing program which should be corrected as soon as possible.

Councilman William D. Schaefer( D., Fifth) said in a letter to Mayor Grady that plowing and salting crews should be dispatched earlier in storms and should be kept on the job longer than they were last month.

Werner criticized

Conceding that several cities to the north were in worse shape than Baltimore after the last storm, Mr. Schaefer listed several improvements he said should be made in the snow plan here.

He said the snow plan was put in effect too slowly in December.

Equipment should be in operation `` almost immediately after the first snowfall '', Mr. Schaefer said.

The Councilman, who is the Administration floor leader, also criticized Bernard L. Werner, public works director, for `` halting snow operations '' on Tuesday night after the Sunday storm.

Sent home for rest

Mr. Werner said yesterday that operations continued through the week.

What he did, Mr. Werner said, was let manual laborers go home Tuesday night for some rest.

Work resumed Wednesday, he said.

Mr. Schaefer also recommended that the snow emergency route plan, under which parking is banned on key streets and cars are required to use snow tires or chains on them, should be `` strictly enforced ''.

Admitting that main streets and the central business district should have priority, the Councilman said it is also essential that small shopping areas `` not be overlooked if our small merchants are to survive ''.

Recounting personal observations of clearance work, the Councilman cited instances of inefficient use of equipment or supplies by poorly trained workers and urged that plow blades be set so they do not leave behind a thin layer of snow which eventually freezes.

Annapolis, Jan. 7( special)

-- The 15-year-old adopted son of a Washington attorney and his wife, who were murdered early today in their Chesapeake Bay-front home, has been sent to Spring Grove State Hospital for detention.

The victims were H. Malone Dresbach, 47, and his wife, Shirley, 46.

Each had been shot in the back several times with a

automatic rifle, according to Capt. Elmer Hagner, chief of Anne Arundel detectives.

Judge Benjamin Michaelson signed the order remanding the boy to the hospital because of the lack of juvenile accommodations at the Anne Arundel County Jail.

The Circuit Court jurist said the boy will have a hearing in Juvenile Court.

Younger son calls police

Soon after 10 A.M., when police reached the 1-1/2-story brick home in the Franklin Manor section, 15 miles south of here on the bay, in response to a call from the Dresbach's other son, Lee, 14, they found Mrs. Dresbach's body on the first-floor bedroom floor.

Her husband was lying on the kitchen floor, police said.

The younger son told police his brother had run from the house after the shootings and had driven away in their mother's car.

The description of the car was immediately broadcast throughout Southern Maryland on police radio.

Two brothers adopted

Police said the boys are natural brothers and were adopted as small children by the Dresbachs.

Trooper J. A. Grzesiak spotted the wanted car, with three boys, at a Route 2 service station, just outside Annapolis.

The driver admitted he was the Dresbachs' son and all three were taken to the Edgewater Station, police said.

Annapolis, Jan. 7

-- Governor Tawes today appointed Lloyd L. Simpkins, his administrative assistant, as Maryland's Secretary of State.

Mr. Simpkins will move into the post being vacated by Thomas B. Finan, earlier named Attorney General to succeed C. Ferdinand Sybert, who will be elevated to an associate judgeship on the Maryland Court of Appeals.

Governor Tawes announced that a triple swearing-in ceremony will be held in his office next Friday.

Simpkins from Somerset

Mr. Simpkins is a resident of Somerset county, and he and the Governor, also a Somerset countian, have been friends since Mr. Simpkins was a child.

Now 38, Mr. Simpkins was graduated from the University of Maryland's College of Agriculture in 1947.

Five years later, he was awarded the university's degree in law.

Mr. Simpkins made a name for himself as a member of the House of Delegates from 1951 through 1958.

From the outset of his first term, he established himself as one of the guiding spirits of the House of Delegates.

Maryland contracts for future construction during October totaled $77,389,000, up to 10 per cent compared to October, 1960, F. W. Dodge, Dodge Corporation, reported.

Dodge reported the following breakdown:

Nonresidential at $20,447,000, down 28 per cent;;

residential at $47,101,000, up 100 per cent;;

and heavy engineering at $9,841,000, down 45 per cent.

The cumulative total of construction contracts for the first ten months of 1961 amounted to $634,517,000, a 4 per cent increase compared to the corresponding period of last year.

A breakdown of the ten-month total showed:

Nonresidential at $253,355,000, up 22 per cent;;

residential at $278,877,000, up 12 per cent;;

and heavy engineering at $102,285,000, down 33 per cent.

Residential building consists of houses, apartments, hotels, dormitories and other buildings designed for shelter.

The share of the new housing market enjoyed by apartments, which began about six years ago, has more than tripled within that span of time.

In 1961, it is estimated that multiple unit dwellings will account for nearly 30 per cent of the starts in residential construction.

While availability of mortgage money has been a factor in encouraging apartment construction, the generally high level of prosperity in the past few years plus rising consumer income are among the factors that have encouraged builders to concentrate in the apartment-building field.

Although economic and personal circumstances vary widely among those now choosing apartments, Leo J. Pantas, vice president of a hardware manufacturing company, pointed out recently that many apartment seekers seem to have one characteristic in common: a desire for greater convenience and freedom from the problems involved in maintaining a house.

Convenience held key

`` Convenience is therefore the key to the housing market today.

Trouble-free, long-life, quality components will play an increasingly important part in the merchandising of new housing in 1960 '', Pantas predicted.

Sixty-seven living units are being added to the 165-unit Harbor View Apartments in the Cherry Hill section.

Ultimately the development will comprise 300 units, in two-story and three-story structures.

Various of the apartments are of the terrace type, being on the ground floor so that entrance is direct.

Others, which are reached by walking up a single flight of stairs, have balconies.

The structures housing the apartments are of masonry and frame construction.

Heating is by individual gas-fired, forced warm air systems.

Construction in 1962 will account for about 15 per cent of the gross national product, according to a study by Johns-Manville Corporation.

London, Feb. 9

-- Vital secrets of Britain's first atomic submarine, the Dreadnought, and, by implication, of the entire United States navy's still-building nuclear sub fleet, were stolen by a London-based soviet spy ring, secret service agents testified today.

The Dreadnought was built on designs supplied by the United States in 1959 and was launched last year.

It is a killer sub -- that is, a hunter of enemy subs.

It has a hull patterned on that of the United States navy's Nautilus, the world's first atomic submarine.

Its power unit, however, was derived from the reactor of the more modern American nuclear submarine Skipjack.

Five held for trial

The announcement that the secrets of the Dreadnought had been stolen was made in Bow St. police court here at the end of a three day hearing.

A full trial was ordered for:

Two British civil servants, Miss Ethel Gee, 46, and her newly devoted friend, Harry Houghton, 55, and divorced.

They are accused of whisking secrets out of naval strongrooms over which they kept guard.

Gordon A. Lonsdale, 37, a mystery man presumed to be Russian although he carries a Canadian passport.

When arrested, he had the submarine secrets on a roll of candid camera film as well as anti-submarine secrets in Christmas gift wrapping, it was testified.

Flashed to Moscow

A shadowy couple who call themselves Peter Kroger, bookseller, and wife, Joyce.

( In Washington, the Federal Bureau of Investigation identified the Krogers as Morris and Lola Cohen, an American couple formerly of New York City)

.

In their suburban cottage the crown charges, the Krogers received secrets from the mystery man, usually on the first Saturday evening of each month, and spent much of the week-end getting the secrets off to Moscow, either on a powerful transmitter buried under the kitchen floor or as dots posted over period marks in used books.

Each dot on magnification resumed its original condition as a drawing, a printed page, or a manuscript.

All five pleaded innocent.

Only Miss Gee asked for bail.

Her young British lawyer, James Dunlop, pleaded that she was sorely needed at her Portland home by her widowed mother, 80, her maiden aunt, also 80 and bedridden for 20 years, and her uncle, 76, who once ran a candy shop.

Refuses to grant bail

`` I am not prepared to grant bail to any of them '', said the magistrate, K.J.P. Baraclough.

The trial will be held, probably the first week of March, in the famous Old Bailey central criminal court where Klaus Fuchs, the naturalized British German born scientist who succeeded in giving American and British atomic bomb secrets to Russia and thereby changed world history during the 1950s, was sentenced to 14 years in prison.

Fourteen years is the maximum penalty now faced by the new five, who may have altered history in the 1960s.

Fuchs, after nine and a half years, was released, being given time off for good behavior.

He promptly went to communist East Germany.

The magistrate tonight refused to return to the five $29,000 in American and British currency, mostly $20 bills, and in British government bonds and stocks.

`` This is Russian money '', said Mervin Griffith-Jones for the attorney general's office.

He asserted that the Krogers were the bankers for Moscow, Lonsdale the Red paymaster, and the two civil servants the recipients for selling their country's secrets.

`` Of highest value ''

The fact that secrets of the Dreadnought, and thereby of the American undersea fleet, were involved in the spy case had been hinted at earlier.

But just before luncheon today the fact was announced grimly by the British navy's chief adviser to the cabinet on underwater warfare, Capt. George Symonds.

He said that drawings of the Dreadnought and printed details about the ship were found reproduced in an undeveloped roll of film taken from Lonsdale when he was arrested with the two civil servants outside the Old Vic theater Saturday afternoon, Jan. 7.

The information, he said, would have been of the highest value to a potential enemy.

Court cleared

Just how many sub secrets were being handed over when the ring, watched for six months, was broken remained untold.

The British defending lawyers, who today increased from three to four, demanded to know if they could make the information involved seem of little value to a jury, the chances of their clients would improve.

So in the name of justice the magistrate cleared the court of all except officials to allow the captain to elaborate for almost an hour.

Almost any information about the Dreadnought would also reveal secrets about the American underwater fleet.

Britain began designing the ship in 1956 but got nowhere until the American government decided to end a ban on sharing military secrets with Britain that had been imposed after Fuchs blabbed.

The United States offered to supply a complete set of propelling equipment like that used in the Skipjack.

With the machinery went a complete design for the hull.

The Skipjack was a second generation atomic sub, much advanced on the Nautilus and the other four which preceded it.

Navy's future involved

`` Much of the navy's future depends upon her '', an American naval announcement said on the Skipjack's first arrival in British waters in August, 1959, for exhibition to selected high officers at Portland underwater research station.

It was there that the two accused civil servants were at work.

`` Her basic hull form( a teardrop) and her nuclear power plant will be used for almost all new submarines, including the potent Polaris missile submarines '', the statement went on.

The atom reactor, water cooled, was the result of almost a decade of research at the naval reactors branch of the atomic energy commission and Westinghouse Electric Corp..

Thru development, the reactor and its steam turbines had been reduced greatly in size, and also in complexity, allowing a single propeller to be used, the navy said.

The hull was also a result of almost a decade of work.

It was first tried out on a conventional submarine, the Albacore, in 1954.

The Skipjack became the fastest submarine ever built.

Reputedly it could outrun, underwater, the fastest destroyers.

It could, reputedly, go 70,000 miles without refueling and stay down more than a month.

It was of the hunter-killer type, designed to seek out ships and other submarines with its most advanced gear and destroy them with torpedoes.

The navy captain disclosed also that a list of questions found in Miss Gee's purse would, if completed and handed back, have given the Kremlin a complete picture `` of our current anti-submarine effort and would have shown what we are doing in research and development for the future ''.

Interested in detector

The spy ring also was particularly interested in ASDIC, the underwater equipment for detecting submarines, it was testified.

Range was a vital detail.

Designs of parts were sought.

Six radiomen told how, twice on two days after the ring was nabbed, a transmitter near Moscow was heard calling, using signals, times and wavelengths specified on codes found hidden in cigaret lighters in Lonsdale's apartment and the Krogers' house and also fastened to the transmitter lid.

Oddly, the calls were still heard 11 days after the five were arrested.

The charge that the federal indictment of three Chicago narcotics detail detectives `` is the product of rumor, combined with malice, and individual enmity '' on the part of the federal narcotics unit here was made yesterday in their conspiracy trial before Judge Joseph Sam Perry in federal District court.

The three -- Miles J. Cooperman, Sheldon Teller, and Richard Austin -- and eight other defendants are charged in six indictments with conspiracy to violate federal narcotic laws.

In his opening statement to a jury of eight women and four men, Bernard H. Sokol, attorney for the detectives, said that evidence would show that his clients were `` entirely innocent ''.

' had to know peddlers'

`` When they became members of the city police narcotics unit '', Sokol said, `` they were told they would have to get to know certain areas of Chicago in which narcotics were sold and they would have to get to know people in the narcotics racket.

They, on occasion, posed as addicts and peddlers ''.

Although federal and city narcotic agents sometimes worked together, Sokol continued, rivalries developed when they were `` aiming at the same criminals ''.

This, he added, brought about `` petty jealousies '' and `` petty personal grievances ''.

`` In the same five year period that the United States says they( the detectives) were engaged in this conspiracy '', Sokol continued, `` these three young men received a total of 26 creditable mentions and many special compensations, and were nominated for the Lambert Tree award and the mayor's medal ''.

No comments by U.S.

In opening, D. Arthur Connelly, assistant United States attorney, read the indictment, but made no comments.

Attorneys for the eight other defendants said only that there was no proof of their clients' guilt.

Cooperman and Teller are accused of selling $4,700 worth of heroin to a convicted narcotics peddler, Otis Sears, 45, of 6934 Indiana Av..

Among other acts, Teller and Austin are accused of paying $800 to Sears.

The first witness, Moses Winston Mardis, 5835 Michigan Av., a real estate agent and former bail bondsman, took the stand after opening statements had been made.

But court adjourned after he testified he introduced James White and Jeremiah Hope Pullings, two of the defendants, and also introduced Pullings to Jessy Maroy, a man mentioned in the indictment but not indicted.

Buaford Robinson, 23, of 7026 Stewart Av., a CTA bus driver, was slugged and robbed last night by a group of youths at 51st Street and South Park Way.

Robinson was treated at a physician's office for a cut over his left eyebrow and a possible sprained knee.

His losses included his money bag, containing $40 to $50 and his $214 paycheck.

Robinson told Policemen James Jones and Morgan Lloyd of the Wabash Avenue district that 10 youths boarded his south bound express bus in front of Dunbar Vocational High School, 30th Street and South Park Way, and began `` skylarking ''.

When 51st Street was reached, Robinson related, he stopped the bus and told the youths he was going to call the CTA supervisor.

As he left the bus with his money bag, Robinson added, the largest youth accosted him, a quarrel ensued, and the youth knocked him down.

Then the youths fled with his money.

Mrs. Blanche Dunkel, 60, who has spent 25 years in the Dwight reformatory for women for the murder in 1935 of her son-in-law, Ervin Lang, then 28, appealed for a parole at a hearing yesterday before two Illinois pardon and parole board members, John M. Bookwalter and Joseph Carpentier.

She had been sentenced to 180 years in prison, but former Gov. Stratton commuted her term to 75 years, making her eligible for parole, as one of his last acts in office.

Mrs. Dunkel admitted the slaying and said that the son-in-law became her lover after the death of her daughter in 1934.

It was when he attempted to end the relationship that the murder took place.

The son of a wealthy Evanston executive was fined $100 yesterday and forbidden to drive for 60 days for leading an Evanston policeman on a high speed chase over icy Evanston and Wilmette streets Jan. 20.

The defendant, William L. Stickney 3, 23, of 3211 Park pl., Evanston, who pleaded guilty to reckless driving, also was ordered by Judge James Corcoran to attend the Evanston traffic school each Tuesday night for one month.

Stickney is a salesman for Plee-Zing, Inc., 2544 Green Bay Rd., Evanston, a food brokerage and grocery chain firm, of which his father, William L. Jr., is president.

Patrolman James F. Simms said he started in pursuit when he saw young Stickney speeding north in Stewart Avenue at Central Street.

At Jenks Street, Simms said, the car skidded completely around, just missed two parked cars, and sped east in Jenks.

The car spun around again, Simms said, before Stickney could turn north in Prairie Avenue, and then violated two stop lights as he traveled north into Wilmette in Prairie.

St. Johns, Mich., April 19.

-- A jury of seven men and five women found 21-year-old Richard Pohl guilty of manslaughter yesterday in the bludgeon slaying of Mrs. Anna Hengesbach.

Pohl received the verdict without visible emotion.

He returned to his cell in the county jail, where he has been held since his arrest last July, without a word to his court-appointed attorney, Jack Walker, or his guard.

Stepson vindicated

The verdict brought vindication to the dead woman's stepson, Vincent Hengesbach, 54, who was tried for the same crime in December, 1958, and released when the jury failed to reach a verdict.

Mrs. Hengesbach was killed on Aug. 31, 1958.

Hengesbach has been living under a cloud ever since.

When the verdict came in against his young neighbor, Hengesbach said:

`` I am very pleased to have the doubt of suspicion removed.

Still, I don't wish to appear happy at somebody else's misfortune ''.

Lives on welfare

Hengesbach, who has been living on welfare recently, said he hopes to rebuild the farm which was settled by his grandfather in Westphalia, 27 miles southwest of here.

Hengesbach has been living in Grand Ledge since his house and barn were burned down after his release in 1958.

Pohl confessed the arson while being questioned about several fires in the Westphalia area by State Police.

He also admitted killing Mrs. Hengesbach.

However, the confession, which was the only evidence against him, was retracted before the trial.

Charges in doubt

Assistant Prosecutor Fred Lewis, who tried both the Hengesbach and Pohl cases, said he did not know what would be done about two arson charges pending against Pohl.

Circuit Judge Paul R. Cash did not set a date for sentencing.

Pohl could receive from 1 to 15 years in prison or probation.

Walker said he was considering filing a motion for a new trial which would contend that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence and that there were several errors in trial procedure.

Locked in motel

A verdict against Pohl came at 4:05 p.m. after almost 13-1/2 hours of deliberation.

The jury, which was locked up in a motel overnight, was canvassed at the request of Walker after the verdict was announced.

The jury foreman, Mrs. Olive Heideman, of rural Elsie, said that a ballot was not even taken until yesterday morning and that the first day of deliberation was spent in going over the evidence.

She said the jurors agreed that Pohl's confession was valid.

The jury asked Judge Cash to send in his written definition of the difference between first and second-degree murder and manslaughter.

The verdict came three hours later.

Some 30 spectators remained in the court during the day and were on hand to hear the verdict read.

The trial had packed the large courtroom for more than a week.

A Sterling Township family of six surviving children, whose mother died yesterday as the aftermath to a fire that also killed one of the children, found today they had the help of hundreds of neighbors and school friends.

While neighbor women assumed some of the dead mother's duties, fund-raising events were being planned by a homeowners association and a student council for the hard-hit Henry Kowalski family, 34220 Viceroy.

Mrs. Eleanor Kowalski, 42, died yesterday afternoon in Holy Cross Hospital of burns suffered in a fire that followed a bottled gas explosion Saturday night at the flat of her widowed mother, Mrs. Mary Pankowski, in the adjoining suburb of Warren.

Services tomorrow

Funeral services for Mrs. Kowalski and her daughter, Christine, 11, who died of burns at the same hospital Monday, have been scheduled for 10 a.m. tomorrow in St. Anne's Catholic Church, 31978 Mound, in Warren.

The mother and daughter, who will be buried side by side in Mt. Olivet Cemetery, rested together today in closed caskets at the Lyle Elliott Funeral Home, 31730 Mound, Warren.

Mrs. Pankowski, 61, remained in Holy Cross Hospital as a result of the explosion, which occurred while Mrs. Kowalski fueled a cook stove in the grandmother's small upstairs flat at 2274 Eight Mile Road East.

Held candle

Assistant Fire Chief Chester Cornell said gas fumes apparently were ignited by a candle which one of the three Kowalski girls present held for her mother, because the flat lacked electricity.

Christine's twin sister, Patricia, and Darlene Kowalski, 8, escaped with minor burns.

They are home now with the other Kowalski children, Vicky, 14;;

Dennis, 6;;

Eleanor, 2;;

and Bernardine, 1.

`` All we have left in the world is one another, and we must stay together the way Mother wanted '', Kowalski said in telling his children of their mother's death yesterday afternoon.

Kowalski, a roofer who seldom worked last winter, already was in arrears on their recently purchased split-level home when the tragedy staggered him with medical and funeral bills.

A135 donated

Neighbor women, such as Mrs. Sidney Baker, 2269 Serra, Sterling Township, have been supplying the family with meals and handling household chores with Kowalski's sister-in-law, Mrs. Anna Kowalski, 22111 David, East Detroit.

Another neighbor, Mrs. Frank C. Smith, 2731 Pall Mall, Sterling Township, surprised Kowalski by coming to the home yesterday with $135 collected locally toward the $400 funeral costs.

John C. Houghton, president of the Tareytown Acres Homeowners Association, followed that by announcing plans last night for a door-to-door fund drive throughout their subdivision on behalf of the Kowalski family.

Students help out

Houghton said 6 p.m. Friday had been set for a canvass of all 480 homes in the subdivision, which is located northeast of Dequindre and 14 Mile Road East.

He said contributions also could be mailed to Post Office Box 553, Warren Village Station.

Vicky Kowalski meanwhile learned that several of her fellow students had collected almost $25 for her family during the lunch hour yesterday at Fuhrmann Junior High School, 5155 Fourteen Mile road east.

Principal Clayton W. Pohly said he would allow a further collection between classes today, and revealed that Y-Teen Club past surpluses had been used to provide a private hospital nurse Monday for Mrs. Kowalski.

Funds from dances

Student Council officers announced today the Kowalski family would be given the combined proceeds from a school dance held two weeks ago, and another dance for Fuhrmann's 770 students this Friday night.

`` Furhmann's faculty is proud that this has been a spontaneous effort, started largely among the students themselves, because of fondness for Vicky and sympathy for her entire family, Pohly said.

There also were reports of a collection at the County Line Elementary School, 3505o Dequindre, which has been attended this year by four of the Kowalski children including Christine.

Expresses thanks

Kowalski has spoken but little since the fire last Saturday.

But today he wanted to make a public statement.

`` I never knew there were such neighbors and friends around me and my family.

I wasn't sure there were such people anywhere in the world.

I'll need more than a single day to find the words to properly express my thanks to them ''.

An alert 10-year-old safety patrol boy was congratulated by police today for his part in obtaining a reckless driving conviction against a youthful motorist.

Patrolman George Kimmell, of McClellan Station, said he would recommend a special safety citation for Ralph Sisk, 9230 Vernor east, a third grader at the Scripps School, for his assistance in the case.

Kimmell said he and Ralph were helping children across Belvidere at Kercheval Monday afternoon when a car heading north on Belvidere stopped belatedly inside the pedestrian crosswalk.

Gets car number

Kimmell ordered the driver to back up, watched the children safely across and was approaching the car when it suddenly `` took off at high speed '', he said, narrowly missing him.

Commandeering a passing car, Kimmell pursued the fleeing vehicle, but lost it in traffic.

Returning to the school crossing, the officer was informed by the Sisk boy that he recognized the driver, a neighbor, and had obtained the license number.

The motorist later was identified as Richard Sarkees, 17, of 2433 McClellan, currently on probation and under court order not to drive.

Given 15 days

He was found guilty of reckless driving yesterday by Traffic Judge George T. Murphy, who continued his no-driving probation for another year and ordered him to spend 15 days in the Detroit House of Correction.

The jail sentence is to begin the day after Sarkees graduates from Eastern High School in June.

The long crisis in Laos appeared nearing a showdown today.

Britain announced that it is asking the Soviet Union to agree tomorrow to an immediate cease-fire.

Help asked

In Vientiane, the royal Laotian government decided today to ask its `` friends and neighbors '' for help in fighting what it called a new rebel offensive threatening the southeast Asian kingdom.

Britain's plans to press Russia for a definite cease-fire timetable was announced in London by Foreign Secretary Lord Home.

He said Britain also proposed that the international truce commission should be reconvened, sent to New Delhi and from there to Laos to verify the cease-fire.

A 14-power conference on Laos should then meet on May 5, he said.

Plea for arms

The Laos government plea for help was made by Foreign Minister Tiao Sopsaisana.

He indicated that requests would be made for more U.S. arms and more U.S. military advisers.

He declared the government is thinking of asking for foreign troops if the situation worsens.

One of the first moves made after a cabinet decision was to request the United States to establish a full-fledged military assistance group instead of the current civilian body.

A note making the request was handed to U.S. Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown.

Heavy support

The Laos government said four major Pathet Lao rebel attacks had been launched, heavily supported by troops from Communist North Viet Nam.

The minister, describing the attacks which led up to the appeal, said that 60,000 Communist North Vietnamese were fighting royal army troops on one front -- near Thakhek, in southern-central Laos.

There was no confirmation of such massive assaults from independent sources.

In the past such government claims have been found exaggerated.

Havana, April 19.

-- Two Americans and seven Cubans were executed by firing squads today as Castro military tribunals began decreeing the death penalty for captured invasion forces and suspected collaborators.

A Havana radio broadcast identified the Americans as Howard Anderson and August Jack McNair.

The executions took place at dawn only a few hours after Havana radio announced their conviction by a revolutionary tribunal at Pinar Del Rio, where the executions took place.

Arms plot charged

The broadcast said Anderson, a Seattle ex-marine and Havana businessman, and McNair, of Miami, were condemned on charges of smuggling arms to Cuban rebels.

Anderson operated three Havana automobile service stations and was commander of the Havana American Legion post before it disbanded since the start of Fidel Castro's regime.

Anderson's wife and four children live in Miami.

McNair, 25, was seized March 20 with four Cubans and accused of trying to land a boatload of rifles in Pinar Del Rio, about 35 miles from Havana.

Report others held

At least 20 other Americans were reported to have been arrested in a mass political roundup.

Among them were a number of newsmen, including Henry Raymont, of United Press International, and Robert Berrellez, of Associated Press.

So many Cubans were reported being swept into the Castro dragnet that the massive Sports Palace auditorium and at least one hotel were converted into makeshift jails.

More than 1,000 were said to have been arrested -- 100 of them Roman Catholic priests.

Of the millions who have served time in concentration camps in Siberia as political prisoners of the Soviet state, few emerge in the West to tell about it.

M. Kegham -- the name is a pseudynom -- was a teacher in Bucharest and a member of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation( ARF) -- two reasons the Communists put him away when they arrived in 1945.

Today, M. Kegham was in Detroit, en route to join his wife and children in California.

Emory University's Board of Trustees announced Friday that it was prepared to accept students of any race as soon as the state's tax laws made such a step possible.

`` Emory University's charter and by-laws have never required admission or rejection of students on the basis of race '', board chairman Henry L. Bowden stated.

But an official statement adopted by the 33-man Emory board at its annual meeting Friday noted that state taxing requirements at present are a roadblock to accepting Negroes.

The statement explained that under the Georgia Constitution and state law, tax-exempt status is granted to educational institutions only if they are segregated.

`` Emory could not continue to operate according to its present standards as an institution of higher learning, of true university grade, and meet its financial obligations, without the tax-exemption privileges which are available to it only so long as it conforms to the aforementioned constitutional and statutory provisions '', the statement said.

The statement did not mention what steps might be taken to overcome the legal obstacles to desegregation.

An Emory spokesman indicated, however, that the university itself did not intend to make any test of the laws.

The Georgia Constitution gives the Legislature the power to exempt colleges from property taxation if, among other criteria, `` all endowments to institutions established for white people shall be limited to white people, and all endowments to institutions established for colored people shall be limited to colored people ''.

At least two private colleges in the Atlanta area now or in the past have had integrated student bodies, but their tax-exempt status never has been challenged by the state.

Emory is affiliated with the Methodist Church.

Some church leaders, both clerical and lay, have criticized the university for not taking the lead in desegregation.

Urged in 1954

The student newspaper, The Emory Wheel, as early as the fall of 1954 called for desegregation.

`` From its beginning '', the trustees' statement said Friday, `` Emory University has assumed as its primary commitment a dedication to excellence in Christian higher learning.

Teaching, research and study, according to highest standards, under Christian influence, are paramount in the Emory University policy.

`` As a private institution, supported by generous individuals, Emory University will recognize no obligation and will adopt no policy that would conflict with its purpose to promote excellence in scholarship and Christian education.

`` There is not now, nor has there ever been in Emory University's charter or by-laws any requirement that students be admitted or rejected on the basis of race, color or creed.

Insofar as its own governing documents are concerned, Emory University could now consider applications from prospective students, and others seeking applications from prospective students, and others seeking the opportunity to study or work at the university, irrespective of race, color or creed.

Corporate existence

`` On the other hand, Emory University derives its corporate existence from the State of Georgia.

`` When and if it can do so without jeopardizing constitutional and statutory tax-exemption privileges essential to the maintenance of its educational program and facilities, Emory University will consider applications of persons desiring to study or work at the University without regard to race, color or creed, continuing university policy that all applications shall be considered on the basis of intellectual and moral standards and other criteria designed to assure the orderly and effective conduct of the university and the fulfillment of its mission as an institution of Christian higher education ''.

A young man was killed and two others injured at midnight Friday when the car they were riding slid into a utility pole on Lake Avenue near Waddell Street, NE, police said.

The dead youth was identified as Robert E. Sims, 19, of 1688 Oak Knoll Cir., Aj.

Patrolman G. E. Hammons said the car evidently slid out of control on rain-slick streets and slammed into the pole.

The other occupants were James Willard Olvey, 18, of 963 Ponce De Leon Ave., NE, and Larry Coleman Barnett, 19, of 704 Hill St., SE, both of whom were treated at Grady Hospital for severe lacerations and bruises.

The Atlanta Negro student movement renewed its demands for movie theater integration Friday and threatened picketing and `` stand-ins '' if negotiations failed.

The demands were set forth in letters to seven owners of first-run theaters by the Committee on Appeal for Human Rights.

' intend to attend'

`` We intend to attend the downtown theaters before the first of the year '', the identically worded letters said.

The letters set a Nov. 15 deadline for the start of negotiations.

They indicated that stand-ins and picketing would be started if theater owners failed to cooperate.

Downtown and art theater managers and owners, contacted Friday night for comment on the COAHR request, said they had no knowledge of such a letter, and that it was not in the Friday mail.

However, three of the managers did say that they would agree to attend the proposed meeting if all of the other managers decided to attend.

Gather here

The COAHR letter comes on the eve of a large gathering of theater managers and owners scheduled to begin here Sunday.

Several theater operators said, however, that there is little likelihood of the subject being discussed during the three-day affair.

Student leaders began sporadic efforts to negotiate theater integration several months ago.

Charles A. Black, COAHR chairman, said Friday that three theater representatives had agreed to meet with the students on Oct. 31 but had failed to show up.

He declined to name the three.

Friday's letters asked for a Nov. 15 meeting.

Failure to attend the meeting or explain inability to attend, the letters said, would be considered a `` sign of indifference ''.

Black said COAHR `` hoped to be able to integrate the theaters without taking direct action, but we are pledged to using every legal and nonviolent means at our disposal ''

A prepared statement released by the student group Friday stated that `` extensive research by COAHR into techniques and methods of theater integration in other cities indicated that the presence of picket lines and stand-ins before segregated theaters causes a drop in profits ''

Besides managers of downtown theaters, the students sent letters to owners of art theaters in the uptown area and Buckhead.

R. E. Killingsworth

Raymond E. Killingsworth, 72, died Sunday at his home at 357 Venable St., Aj.

Mr. Kililngsworth was a foreman with S and W Cafeteria.

He was born in Pittsboro, Miss., and was a veteran of World War 1.

He was a member of the Baptist church.

Survivors include two brothers, C. E. Killingsworth, Atlanta, and John Killingsworth, Warren, Ohio;;

and two sisters, Miss Minnie Kililngsworth and Mrs. Bessie Bloom, both of Gettysburg, Pa..

John W. Ball

John William Ball, 68, of 133 Marietta St. NW, Apartment 101b, died Sunday at his home.

Mr. Ball was a house painter.

He was a member of the Oakland City Methodist Church and a native of Atlanta.

Funeral services will be at 2 p.m. Tuesday at Blanchard's Chapel with the Rev. J. H. Hearn officiating.

Survivors include his sister, Mrs. Emma B. Odom of Atlanta.

Mrs. Lola Harris

Mrs. Lola M. Harris, a native of Atlanta, died Sunday at her home in Garland, Tex..

Survivors include a son, Charles R. Fergeson, Memphis, Tenn.;;

two daughters, Mrs. Gene F. Stoll and Miss Nancy Harris, both of Garland;;

her father, H. T. Simpson, Greenville, S.C., and three sisters, Mrs. W. E. Little and Mrs. Hal B. Wansley, both of Atlanta, and Mrs. Bill Wallace, Wilmington, N.C..

A 24-year-old Atlanta man was arrested Sunday after breaking into the home of relatives in search of his wife, hitting his uncle with a rock and assaulting two police officers who tried to subdue him, police said.

Patrolmen J. W. Slate and A. L. Crawford Jr. said they arrested Ronald M. Thomas, of 1671 Nakoma St., NW, after he assaulted the officers.

Police account

The officers gave this account:

Thomas early Sunday went to the home of his uncle and aunt, Mr. and Mrs. R. C. Thomas, 511 Blanche St., NW, looking for his wife, Margaret Lou Thomas, 18, and their 11-month-old baby.

The younger Thomas ripped a screen door, breaking the latch, and after an argument struck his uncle with a rock, scratching his face.

He also struck his aunt and wife, and during the melee the baby also suffered scratches.

When police arrived the man was still violent, Slate said.

Attacks officer

He attacked one of the officers and was restrained.

About five minutes later he jumped up, Slate said, and struck the two policemen again.

He was then subdued and placed in the police car to be taken to Grady Hospital for treatment of scratches received in the melee.

Then he attacked the two officers again and was again restrained, Slate related.

Slate said he and Crawford received cuts and scratches and their uniforms were badly torn.

Thomas was charged with four counts of assault and battery.

Two counts of assault on an officer, resisting arrest, disturbance and cursing, police said.

A hearing was set for 30 a.m. Tuesday.

Mrs. Mary Self, who knows more than any other person about the 5,000 city employes for whom she has kept personnel records over the years, has closed her desk and retired.

Over the weekend, Mrs. Self, personnel clerk, was a feted and honored guest of the Atlanta Club, organization of women employes at City Hall.

After 18 years in the personnel office, she has taken a disability pension on advice of her doctors.

As personnel clerk, she handled thousands of entries, ranging from appointments to jobs, to transfers to other employments, to pensions.

`` I have enjoyed it and will feel a bit lost at least for a while '', she said wistfully Friday.

One of the largest crowds in the club's history turned out to pay tribute to Mrs. Self and her service.

Georgia's Department of Agriculture is intensifying its fire ant eradication program in an effort to stay ahead of the fast-spreading pest.

The department is planning to expand its eradication program soon to four additional counties -- Troup, Pierce, Bryan and Bulloch -- to treat 132,000 acres infested by the ants, according to W. E. Blasingame state entomologist.

Low-flying planes will spread a granular-type chemical, heptachlor, over 30,000 acres in Troup, 37,000 acres in Pierce and 65,000 acres in Bulloch and Bryan counties.

The eradication effort is being pushed in Bibb and Jones counties, over 37,679 acres.

The department has just finished treating 20,000 acres in urban areas of Macon.

Also being treated are Houston, Bleckley, Tift, Turner and Dodge counties, Blasingame said.

The fire ant is thought to infest approximately two million acres of land in Georgia, attacking crops, young wildlife and livestock and can be a serious health menace to humans who are allergic to its venom, Blasingame said.

The north-bound entrance to the Expressway at 14th Street will be closed during the afternoon rush traffic hours this week.

This is being done so that Georgia Tech can complete the final phase of a traffic survey on the North Expressway.

Students have been using electric computers and high speed movie cameras during the study.

Perhaps the engineers can find out what causes all the congestion and suggest methods to eliminate it.

Incidentally, 14th Street and the Expressway is the high accident intersection during daylight hours.

It is followed by Cain Street and Piedmont Avenue, NE;;

the junction of the Northeast and Northwest Expressways and Jones Avenue and Marietta Street, Aj.

Four persons died in Georgia weekend traffic crashes, two of them in a fiery crash near Snellville, the State Patrol said Sunday.

The latest death reported was that of 4-year-old Claude Douglas Maynor of Calvary.

Troopers said the child ran into the path of a passing car a half-mile north of Calvary on Georgia 111 in Grady County.

That death occurred at 50 p.m. Friday and was reported Sunday, the patrol said.

Bursts into flames

An auto overturned, skidding into a stopped tractor-trailer and burst into flames near Snellville, the patrol said.

Bobby Bester Hammett, 21, of Rte. 3, Lawrenceville, and Mrs. Lucille Herrington Jones, 23, of Lawrenceville, died in the flaming car, the patrol said.

Salem( special)

-- For a second month in a row, Multnomah County may be short of general assistance money in its budget to handle an unusually high summer month's need, the state public welfare commission was told Friday.

It is the only county in the state so far this month reporting a possible shortage in GA category, for which emergency allotment can be given by the state if necessary.

William Smythe, director of field service, told the commissioners that Multnomah, as of Aug. 22, had spent $58,918 out of its budgeted $66,000 in the category, leaving only $7,082 for the rest of the month.

At the rate of need indicated in the early weeks of the month, this could mean a shortage of as high as $17,000.

But it probably will be less because of a usual slackening during the last weeks of each month, Smythe said.

No request for emergency allotment had yet been received, however.

Board oks pact

The commission, meeting for the first time with both of its newly-appointed commissioners, Roy Webster, of Hood River, and Dr. Ennis Keizer, of North Bend, approved a year's contract for a consultant in the data processing department who has been the center of considerable controversy in the past.

The contract with Ray Field, who has been converting the agencies electronic data processing program to magnetic tape, would renew his present salary of $8 an hour up to a maximum of 200 hours a month.

Field does the planning for the machine operations and fiscal processes and the adapting of the data processing system to new programs as they are made necessary by legislative and policy changes.

Acting Administrator Andrew F. Juras said that because of Field's unique position and knowledge in the program, the agency now would be seriously handicapped if he was not continued for a period.

But he emphasized that the agency must train people within its own employ to fulfill what Field handles, and he said he personally `` regrets very much that the agency has not done this in the past ''.

He pointed out to the commissioners that the agency was literally dependent now on the machine processing, `` and the whole wheels of the agency would stop if it broke down or the three or four persons directing it were to leave ''.

Salary termed modest

Juras said he insisted Field be continued on a consultant basis only and be answerable directly to the administrator of the agency and not to other agencies of the government.

He also said that the salary, in terms of going rates in the field, was `` modest '' in terms of the man's responsibility.

The conversion to magnetic tape is not yet completed, he said, and added Field's long service in state government and welfare employ gave him familiarity with the welfare program.

`` Do you feel you can stand up to the next legislative session and defend this contract ''??

Asked Mrs. Grace O. Peck, representative from Multnomah County, of the commission chairman, Joseph E. Harvey Jr..

`` My feeling at the moment '', he said, `` is that we have no alternative, irrespective of some of the arguments about him.

The continued operation of this program depends on having his service ''.

Harvey criticized

Mrs. Peck, later joined by the commission's vice-chairman, Mrs. Lee Patterson, took Harvey to task for comments he had made to the North Portland Rotary Club Tuesday.

A publicity release from Oregon Physicians Service, of which Harvey is president, quoted him as saying the welfare office move to Salem, instead of `` crippling '' the agency, had provided an avenue to correct administrative weaknesses, with the key being improved communications between F& A and the commission staff.

`` I rather resent '', she said, `` you speaking to those groups in Portland as though just the move accomplished this.

I think you fell short of the real truth in the matter: That the move is working out through the fine cooperation of the staff and all the people.

The staff deserves a lot of credit working down here under real obstacles ''.

Harvey said his objective was to create a better public image for welfare ''.

The wife of convicted bank robber Lawrence G. Huntley was arrested in Phoenix, Ariz., last week and will be returned to Portland to face charges of assault and robbery, Portland detectives said Friday.

Mrs. Lavaughn Huntley is accused of driving the getaway car used in a robbery of the Woodyard Bros.' Grocery, 2825 E. Burnside St., in April of 1959.

Her husband, who was sentenced to 15 years in the federal prison at McNeil Island last April for robbery of the Hillsdale branch of Multnomah Bank, also was charged with the store holdup.

Secret Grand Jury indictments were returned against the pair last week, Detective Murray Logan reported.

The Phoenix arrest culminates more than a year's investigation by Detective William Taylor and other officers.

Taylor said Mrs. Huntley and her husband also will be questioned about a series of 15 Portland robberies in spring of 1959 in which the holdup men bound their victims with tape before fleeing.

Mrs. Huntley was held on $20,000 bond in Phoenix.

She was arrested by Phoenix Police after they received the indictment papers from Portland detectives.

A 12-year-old girl, Susan Elaine Smith, 9329 NE Schuyler St. was in serious condition Friday at Bess Kaiser Hospital, victim of a bicycle-auto collision in the Gateway Shopping Center, parking area, Deputy Sheriff W. H. Forsyth reported.

Funeral for William Joseph Brett, 1926 NE 50th Ave., who died Thursday in Portland, will be Monday 1 p.m. at the Riverview Abbey.

Mr. Brett, born in Brooklyn, N.Y., Dec. 15, 1886, came to Portland in 1920.

He owned a logging equipment business here from 1923 to 1928, and later became Northwest district manager for Macwhyte Co..

He retired in 1958.

Survivors are his widow, Alice;;

a son, William, Seattle, Wash.;;

three sisters, Mrs. Eugene Horstman, Los Angeles, Mrs. Lucy Brett Andrew, New York City, and Mrs. Beatrice Kiefferm, New York City, and five grandchildren.

Employes of Montgomery Ward& Co. at The Dalles, in a National Labor Relations Board election Thursday voted to decertify Local 1565, Retail Clerks International Association, AFL-CIO, as their collective bargaining agent.

The NLRB said that of 11 potentially eligible voters eight voted against the union, two voted for it, and one vote was challenged.

Monte Brooks, 67, theatrical producer and band leader, collapsed and died Thursday in a Lloyd Center restaurant.

He lived at 6124 N. Willamette Blvd..

For many years he had provided music and entertainment for functions throughout the Northwest.

These included Oregon State Fair, for which he had been booked on and off, for 30 years.

He collaborated with many of the big name entertainers visiting Portland, among the most recent being Jimmy Durante and Phil Silvers.

He had conducted the 20-piece band in a series of concerts at Blue Lake park during the summer months.

Mr. Brooks was born in New York, and came to Portland in 1920.

He planned at one time to enter the legal profession, but gave up the plan in favor of the entertainment field.

He was a member of Harmony lodge, No. 12, AF& AM, Scottish Rite;;

Al Kader Temple of the Shrine;;

Order of Elks, Lodge No. 142;;

40& 8 Voiture, No. 25, Musician's Union, Local 99.

He was a former commander of Willamette Heights, Post, and a member of Nevah Sholom Congregation.

Survivors are his widow, Tearle;;

a son, Sheldon Brooks;;

a daughter, Mrs. Sidney S. Stein Jr., Dorenzo, Calif.;;

a sister, Mrs. Birdie Gevurtz;;

two brothers, Charley and Aaron Cohn, San Francisco;;

and five grandchildren.

Services will be at 30 p.m. Monday at Holman& Son Funeral Home, with interment in Neveh Zebek cemetery.

The family requests that flowers be omitted.

A 16-year-old Portland businessman and his Junior Achievement company, have been judged the `` Company of the Year '' in national competition completed this week at Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.

Tim Larson, a junior at Wilson High School and president of Spice-Nice, is the young executive who guided his firm to the top-ranking position over the 4,500 other Junior Achievement companies in the United States and Canada.

The award is the first such honor in the 11-year history of JA activities in Portland, according to Ralph Scolatti, local executive director for Junior Achievement.

Spice-Nice, counseled by Georgia-Pacific Corp., had previously taken first-place honors in both local competition and the regional conference at San Francisco.

The `` pocket-size '' company set records with $2,170 in sales of its products, a selection of barbecue spices, and paid stockholders a 20 per cent dividend on their investment.

Youngsters do business

The Junior Achievement program is designed to give teenagers practical experience in business by allowing them actually to form small companies, under the guidance and sponsorship of business firms.

The youngsters sell stock, produce and sell a product, pay taxes, and show a profit or loss just like full-scale businesses.

National competition was the culmination of work which began with the school year last fall and continued until just before summer vacation.

Participants in the 27 Portland companies worked one night a week through the school year, guided and counseled by adult advisors drawn from local business and industry.

Over 400 Portland firms contributed funds for the maintenance of Junior Achievement headquarters here.

For winning Larson will receive a $100 U.S. Savings Bond from the Junior Achievement national organization.

His company, Spice-Nice, will receive a $250 award, which will be distributed among the 16 charter members.

g-p men served

Advisors for the `` national champion '' company were John K. Morgan, William H. Baker, Leonard Breuer and William F. Stephenson, all of Georgia-Pacific Corp..

Young Larson is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence Larson, 5847 SW Nevada Ct., Portland.

Other members of the Portland delegation attending the conference in Columbus are: Kathleen Mason, Jefferson high school;;

Phil Reifenrath, Madison high school;;

Ann Wegener, Madison;;

Richard E. Cohn, Grant;;

Karen Kolb, Franklin;;

and Shelby Carlson, Cleveland.

Hillsboro( special)

-- Washington County's 36th annual fair will close Saturday evening with 4-H and FFA awards program at 7, public dance at 8 and variety show at 8:30.

On the day's schedule are a flower show, 4-H horsemanship contest and clown shows, the latter at 11 a.m. and 3 p.m..

Attendance continued to run ahead of last year's during the five-day show, with clear skies helping attract fairgoers.

Exhibition ballroom dancers from the studio of Helen Wick Walters of Hillsboro won the all-county talent contest.

Bill Davis quartet of Hillsboro was second and baton twirler Sue Ann Nuttall of Reedville third.

Finalists from the county's east end failed to place.

Results:

Janet Jossy of North Plains won grand champion honors of the 4-H sheep showman contest.

Blue ribbons went to Stephanie Shaw of Hillsboro, Larry Hinton of Beaverton.

Joan Zurcher of Hillsboro, Phyllis Jossy of North Plains, Jane Cox of North Plains.

Kathy Jossy of Hillsboro, Carol Jossy of North Plains and Lorlyn and Tom Zurcher of Hillsboro.

Tom Day of Beaverton exhibited the grand champion 4-H market hog, a Chester White.

Also winning blue ribbons were Bob Day of Beaverton, Tony Traxel of Beaverton and Steve Hutchins of Banks.

Swine showmanship championship went to Bob Day, with Tom Day and Hutchins winning other blues.

Charles Reynolds of Pumpkin Ridge was rabbit showmanship champion.

In poultry judging, blues were won by John Nyberg of Tualatin, Anne Batchelder of Hillsboro, Jim Shaw of Hillsboro, Stephanie Shaw of Hillsboro and Lynn Robinson of Tigard.

Blue ribbon for one dozen white eggs was taken by Nyberg.

In open class poultry, Donald Wacklin of Sherwood had the champion male and female bird and grand champion bird.

John Haase& Son of Corneilus was the only entrant in open class swine and swept all championships.

Carol Strong, 13, of Cedar Mill cooked the championship junior dollar dinner.

Millie Jansen, high school senior from Verboort, had the championship dollar dinner, and Jody Jaross of Hillsboro also won a blue ribbon.

Barbara Borland of Tigard took top senior individual home economics honors with a demonstration called filbert hats.

About 70 North Providence taxpayers made appeals to the board of tax assessors for a review of their 1961 tax assessments during the last two days at the town hall in Centredale.

These were the last two days set aside by the board for hearing appeals.

Appeals were heard for two days two weeks ago.

About 75 persons appeared at that time.

Louis H. Grenier, clerk of the board, said that the appeals will be reviewed in December at the time the board is visiting new construction sites in the town for assessment purposes.

They also will visit properties on which appeals have been made.

Any adjustments which are made, Mr. Grenier said earlier this month, will appear on the balance of the tax bill since most of the town's taxpayers take the option of paying quarterly with the balance due next year.

John Pezza, 69, of 734 Hartford Avenue, Providence, complained of shoulder pains after an accident in which a car he was driving collided with a car driven by Antonio Giorgio, 25, of 12 DeSoto St., Providence, on Greenville Avenue and Cherry Hill Road in Johnston yesterday.

Mr. Giorgio had started to turn left off Greenville Avenue onto Cherry Hill Road when his car was struck by the Pezza car, police said.

Both cars were slightly damaged.

Mr. Pezza was taken to a nearby Johnston physician, Dr. Allan A. DiSimone, who treated him.

Mr. Giorgio was uninjured.

Thieves yesterday ransacked a home in the Garden Hills section of Cranston and stole an estimated $3,675 worth of furs, jewels, foreign coins and American dollars.

Mr. and Mrs. Stephen M. Kochanek reported the theft at their home on 41 Garden Hills Drive at about 6 last night.

They told police the intruders took a mink coat worth $700, a black Persian lamb jacket worth $450;;

a wallet with $450 in it;;

a collection of English, French and German coins, valued at $500;;

four rings, a watch and a set of pearl earrings.

One of the rings was a white gold band with a diamond setting, valued at $900.

The others were valued at $325, $75 and $65.

The watch was valued at $125 and the earrings at $85.

The Kochaneks told police they left home at 8 a.m. and returned about 45 p.m. and found the house had been entered.

Patrolman Robert J. Nunes, who investigated, said the thieves broke in through the back door.

Drawers and cabinets in two bedrooms and a sewing room were ransacked.

The city sewer maintenance division said efforts will be made Sunday to clear a stoppage in a sewer connection at Eddy and Elm Streets responsible for dumping raw sewage into the Providence River.

The division said it would be impossible to work on the line until then because of the large amount of acid sewage from jewelry plants in the area flowing through the line, heavy vehicle traffic on Eddy Street and tide conditions.

A two-family house at 255 Brook Street has been purchased by Brown University from Lawrence J. Sullivan, according to a deed filed Monday at City Hall.

F. Morris Cochran, university vice president and business manager, said the house has been bought to provide rental housing for faculty families, particularly for those here for a limited time.

Employes of Pawtucket's garbage and rubbish collection contractor picketed the firm's incinerator site yesterday in the second day of a strike for improved wages and working conditions.

Thomas Rotelli, head of Rhode Island Incinerator Service, Inc., said four of the company's eight trucks were making collections with both newly hired and regular workers.

Sydney Larson, a staff representative for the United Steel Workers, which the firm's 25 workers joined before striking, said the state Labor Relations Board has been asked to set up an election to pick a bargaining agent.

A 62-year-old Smithfield man, Lester E. Stone of 19 Beverly Circle, was in satisfactory condition last night at Our Lady of Fatima Hospital, North Providence, with injuries suffered when a car he was driving struck a utility pole on Woonasquatucket Avenue in North Providence near Stevens Street.

Mr. Stone suffered fractured ribs and chest cuts, hospital authorities said.

He was taken to the hospital by the North Providence ambulance.

Before hitting the pole, Mr. Stone's car brushed against a car driven by Alva W. Vernava, 21, of 23 Maple Ave., North Providence, tearing away the rear bumper and denting the left rear fender of the Vernava car, police said.

Mr. Vernava was uninjured.

The impact with the utility pole caused a brief power failure in the immediate area of the accident.

One house was without power for about half an hour, a Narragansett Electric Co. spokesman said.

The power was off for about five minutes in houses along Smith Street as far away as Fruit Hill Avenue shortly before 5 p.m. when the accident occurred.

The fight over the Warwick School Committee's appointment of a coordinator of audio-visual education may go to the state Supreme Court, it appeared last night.

Two members of the Democratic-endorsed majority on the school board said they probably would vote to appeal a ruling by the state Board of Education, which said yesterday that the school committee acted improperly in its appointment of the coordinator, Francis P. Nolan 3rd, the Democratic-endorsed committee chairman, could not be reached for comment.

In its ruling, the state Board of Education upheld Dr. Michael F. Walsh, state commissioner of education, who had ruled previously that the Warwick board erred when it named Maurice F. Tougas as coordinator of audio-visual education without first finding that the school superintendent's candidate was not suitable.

Supt. Clarence S. Taylor had recommended Roger I. Vermeersch for the post.

Milton and Rosella Lovett of Cranston were awarded $55,000 damages from the state in Superior Court yesterday for industrial property which they owned at 83 Atwells Ave., Providence, and which was condemned for use in construction of Interstate Route 95.

The award was made by Judge Fred B. Perkins who heard their petition without a jury by agreement of the parties.

The award, without interest, compared with a valuation of $57,500 placed on the property by the property owners' real estate expert, and a valuation of $52,500 placed on it by the state's expert.

The property included a one-story brick manufacturing building on 8,293 square feet of land.

Saul Hodosh represented the owners.

Atty. Gen. J. Joseph Nugent appeared for the state.

Santa's lieutenants in charge of the Journal-Bulletin Santa Claus Fund are looking for the usual generous response this year from Cranston residents.

Persons who find it convenient may send their contributions to the Journal-Bulletin's Cranston office at 823 Park Avenue.

All contributed will be acknowledged.

The fund's statewide quota this year is $8,250 to provide Christmas gifts for needy youngsters.

Scores of Cranston children will be remembered.

Cranston residents have been generous contributors to the fund over the years.

Public school children have adopted the fund as one of their favorite Christmas charities and their pennies, nickels, dimes and quarters aid greatly in helping Santa to reach the fund's goal.

Bernard Parrillo, 20, of 19 Fletcher Ave., Cranston, was admitted to Roger Williams Hospital shortly before 11:30 a.m. yesterday after a hunting accident in which a shotgun he was carrying discharged against his heel.

Mr. Parrillo was given first aid at Johnston Hose 1.

( Thornton) where he had been driven by a companion.

The two had been hunting in the Simmonsville area of town and Mr. Parrillo dropped the gun which fired as it struck the ground.

Hospital officials said the injury was severe but the youth was in good condition last night.

A check for $4,177.37 representing the last payment of a $50,000 federal grant to Rhode Island Hospital was presented to the hospital administrator, Oliver G. Pratt, yesterday by Governor Notte.

The hospital has used the money to assist in alterations on the fifth floor of the Jane Brown Hospital, part of Rhode Island Hospital.

The work added eight beds to the hospital, giving it a total capacity of 646 general beds.

Vincent Sorrentino, founder and board chairman of the Uncas Mfg. Co., has been designated a Cavaliere of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Italy.

The decoration will be presented by A. Trichieri, Italian consul general in Boston, at a ceremony at 30 p.m. on Dec. 7 at the plant, which this year is celebrating its golden anniversary.

About 500 employes of the firm will be on hand to witness bestowal of the honor upon Mr. Sorrentino.

Mr. Sorrentino will be honored on the evening of Dec. 7 at a dinner to be given by the Aurora Club at the Sheraton-Biltmore Hotel.

The Newport-based destroyer picket escort Kretchmer has arrived back at Newport after three months' patrol in North Atlantic waters marked by mercy jobs afloat and ashore.

On Sept. 6, the Kretchmer rescued the crew of a trawler they found drifting on a life raft after they had abandoned a sinking ship.

In August while stopping in Greenock, Scotland, three members of the crew on liberty rendered first aid to a girl who fell from a train.

Local authorities credited the men with saving the girl's life.

Birmingham, Ala. --( AP)

-- The FBI yesterday arrested on a perjury charge one of the members of the jury that failed to reach a verdict in the `` Freedom Rider '' bus burning trial four weeks ago.

U.S. Attorney Macon Weaver said the federal complaint, charged that the juror gave false information when asked about Ku Klux Klan membership during selection of jury.

He identified the man as Lewis Martin Parker, 59, a farmer of Hartselle, Ala..

Eight men were tried together in U.S. District Court in Anniston, Ala., on charges of interfering with interstate transportation and conspiracy growing out of a white mob's attack on a Greyhound bus carrying the first of the Freedom Riders.

The bus was burned outside Anniston.

One of the eight defendants was freed on a directed verdict of acquittal.

A mistrial was declared in the case against the other seven when the jury was unable to agree on a verdict.

The arrest of Mr. Parker marks the third charge of wrongdoing involving the jury that heard the case.

The first incident occurred before the trial got under way when Judge H. Hobart Grooms told the jury panel he had heard reports of jury-tampering efforts.

He asked members of the panel to tell him if anyone outside the court had spoken to them about the case.

Two members of the panel later told in court about receiving telephone calls at their homes from anonymous persons expressing interest in the trial.

Neither was seated on the jury.

Then, when the case went to the jury, the judge excused one of the jurors, saying the juror had told him he had been accosted by masked men at his motel the night before the trial opened.

The juror said the masked men had advised him to be lenient.

The judge replaced the juror with an alternate.

No formal charges have been filed as a result of either of the two reported incidents.

At the opening of the trial, the jury panel was questioned as a group by Mr. Weaver about Ku Klux Klan connections.

One member of the panel -- not Mr. Parker -- indicated he had been a member of the KKK at one time.

He was not seated on the jury.

The perjury charge against Mr. Parker carries a maximum penalty of $2,000 fine and five years imprisonment on conviction.

New York --( UPI)

-- The New York University Board of Trustees has elected the youngest president in the 130-year history of NYU, it was announced yesterday.

The new president is 37-year-old Dr. James McN. Hester, currently dean of the NYU Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.

He will take over his new post Jan. 1.

Dr. Hester, also one of the youngest men ever to head a major American university, succeeds Dr. Carroll V. Newsom who resigned last September to join Prentice-Hall Inc. publishing firm.

Dr. Hester, of Princeton, N.J., is a native of Chester, Pa. He joined NYU in September, 1960.

Prior to that he was associated with Long Island University in Brooklyn.

Asilomar, March 26

Vast spraying programs conducted by `` technicians with narrow training and little wisdom '' are endangering crops and wildlife, Carl W. Buchheister, president of the National Audubon Society, said today.

`` It is like handing a loaded automatic to an 8-year-old and telling him to run out and play '', he commented.

Buchheister told delegates to the West Coast Audubon Convention that aerial spraying in Louisiana failed to destroy its target, the fire ant.

`` But it did destroy the natural controls of a borer and released a new plague that wrecked a sugar cane crop '', he said.

The conservation leader said other mistakes in spraying had caused serious damage in Ohio and Wyoming.

There have even been serious errors in the U. S. Forest Service, whose officials pride themselves in their scientific training, he added.

`` The news of their experiments reaches the farmers who, forgetting that birds are the most efficient natural enemies of insects and rodents, are encouraged to try to get rid of all birds that occasionally peck their grapes or their blueberries '', Buchheister told the delegates.

In addition to urging greater restrictions on aerial spraying, Buchheister called for support of the Wilderness bill, creation of national seashore parks, including Point Reyes;;

preservation of the wetlands where birds breed;;

a pesticides co-ordination act;;

stronger water pollution control programs, and Federal ratification of an international convention to halt pollution of the sea by oil.

The Reed Rogers Da Fonta Wild Life Sanctuary in Marin county on Friday officially became the property of the National Audubon Society.

Mrs. Norman Livermore, president of the Marin Conservation League, handed over the deed to the 645-acre tidelands tract south of Greenwood Beach to Carl W. Buchheister, president of the Society.

The presentation was made before several hundred persons at the annual meeting of the League at Olney Hall, College of Marin, Kentfield.

Buchheister pledged the land would be an `` inviolate '' sanctuary for all birds, animals and plants.

Seventeen years ago today, German scientist Willy Fiedler climbed into a makeshift cockpit installed in a V-1 rocket-bomb that was attached to the underbelly of a Heinkel bomber.

The World War 2, German bomber rolled down a runway and took off.

The only way Fiedler could get back to earth alive was to fly the pulse jet missile and land it on the airstrip.

This had never been done before.

Now a quiet-spoken, middle-aged man, Fiedler is an aeronautical engineer for Lockheed's Missiles and Space Division at Sunnyvale, where he played a key role in the development of the Navy's Polaris missile.

He sat in his office yesterday and recalled that historic flight in 1944.

`` The first two pilots had crashed '', he said.

`` I had developed the machines and therefore knew them.

It was time to go up myself ''.

Fiedler was then technical director of Hitler's super-secret `` Reichenberg project '', which remained unknown to the Allies until after the war.

About 200 of the special V-1 rocket-bombs were to be made ready for manned flight with an explosive warhead.

The target was Allied shipping -- a desperate effort to stave off the Allied invasion of Europe.

The success of the project depended upon Fiedler's flight.

Squeezed into the few cubic feet normally filled by the rocket's automatic guidance mechanism, the scientist waited while the bomber gained altitude.

At 12,000 feet, Fiedler signaled `` release '', and started the roaring pulse-jet engine -- then streaked away from beneath the Heinkel.

To the German pilot in the bomber the rocket became a faint black speck, hurtling through the sky at the then incredible speed of 420 m.p.h..

It was probably man's first successful flight in a missile.

`` She flew beautifully '', said Fiedler.

`` There was only one power control -- a valve to adjust the fuel flow.

I had exactly 20 minutes to get down to the test strip ''.

Using a steering system that controlled the modified rocket's tail surfaces and wings equipped with ailerons, Fiedler was to land the missile on a skid especially bolted under the fuselage.

He managed to maneuver the missile to a landing speed of 200 m.p.h. -- fast even for a modern jet plane touchdown -- and banked into the airfield.

Moments later the V-1 skimmed across the landing strip, edging closer and closer to a touchdown -- then in a streamer of dust it landed.

Fiedler went on to make several other test flights before German pilots took over the Reichenberg missiles.

The missiles were to be armed with an underwater bomb.

Pilots would steer them in a suicide dive into the water, striking below the waterline of individual ships.

A crack corps of 50 pilots was formed from the ranks of volunteers, but the project was halted before the end of the war, and the missiles later fell into Allied hands.

Now a family man with three children, Fiedler lives in a quiet residential area near the Lockheed plant at Sunnyvale.

His spare time is spent in soaring gliders.

`` It's so quiet '', he said, `` so slow, serene -- and so challenging ''.

John Di Massimo has been elected president of the 1961 Columbus Day Celebration Committee, it was announced yesterday.

Other officers are Angelo J. Scampini, vice president, Joseph V. Arata, treasurer, and Fred J. Casassa, secretary.

Judge John B. Molinari was named chairman of the executive committee.

Elected to the board of directors were:

Elios P. Anderlini, Attilio Beronio, Leo M. Bianco, Frederic Campagnoli, Joseph Cervetto, Armond J. De Martini, Grace Duhagon, John P. Figone, John P. Figone Jr., Stephen Mana, John Moscone, Calude Perasso, Angelo Petrini, Frank Ratto, and George R. Reilly.

Dr. Albert Schweitzer, world-famous theologian and medical missionary, has endorsed an Easter March for Disarmament which begins tomorrow in Sunnyvale.

Members of the San Francisco American Friends Service, a Quaker organization, will march to San Francisco for a rally in Union Square at 2 p.m. Saturday.

In a letter to the American Friends Service, Dr. Schweitzer wrote:

`` Leading Nations of the West and of the East keep busy making newer nuclear weapons to defend themselves in the event the constantly threatening nuclear war should break out.

`` They cannot do otherwise than live in dread of each other since these weapons imply the possibility of such grisly surprise attack.

The only way out of this state of affairs is agreement to abolish nuclear weapons;;

otherwise no peace is possible.

`` Governments apparently do not feel obligated to make the people adequately aware of this danger;;

therefore we need guardians to demonstrate against the ghastly stupidity of nuclear weapons and jolt the people out of their complacency ''.

A federal grand jury called 10 witnesses yesterday in an investigation of the affairs of Ben Stein, 47, who collected big fees as a `` labor consultant '' and operator of a janitors' service.

Before he testified for 20 minutes, Stein, who lives at 3300 Lake Shore Dr., admitted to reporters that he had a wide acquaintance with crime syndicate hoodlums.

Glimco a buddy

Among his gangland buddies, he said, were Joseph( Joey) Glimco, a mob labor racketeer, and four gang gambling chiefs, Gus( Slim) Alex, Ralph Pierce, Joe( Caesar) DiVarco, and Jimmy( Monk) Allegretti.

Another hoodlum, Louis Arger, drew $39,000 from Stein's janitor firm, the National Maintenance company, in three years ending in 1959, Stein disclosed in an interview.

`` I put Arger on the payroll because he promised to get my firm the stevedore account at Navy pier '', Stein said.

`` But Arger never was able to produce it, so I cut him off my payroll ''.

Connection is sought

Other witnesses, after appearances before the jury, which reportedly is probing into possible income tax violations, disclosed that government prosecutors were attempting to connect Stein and his company with a number of gangsters, including Glimco and Alex.

The federal lawyers, according to their witnesses, also were tracing Stein's fees as a labor consultant.

Under scrutiny, two of the witnesses said, were payments and loans to Stein's National Maintenance company at 543 Madison St..

The company supplies janitors and workmen for McCormick Place and factories, liquor firms, and other businesses.

Lee a witness

Among the witnesses were Ed J. Lee, director of McCormick Place;;

Jerome Leavitt, a partner in the Union Liquor company, 3247 S. Kedzie Av., Dominic Senese, a teamster union slugger who is a buddy of Stein and a cousin of Tony Accardo, onetime gang chief;;

and Frank W. Pesce, operator of a Glimco dominated deodorant firm, the Best Sanitation and Supply company, 1215 Blue Island Av..

Lee said he had told the jury that he made an agreement in April with Stein to supply and supervise janitors in McCormick Place.

Stein's fee, Lee said, was 10 per cent of the janitors' pay.

Stein estimated this amount at `` about $1,500 or $1,600 a month ''.

A $12,500 payment

Leavitt, as he entered the jury room, said he was prepared to answer questions about the $12,500 his liquor firm paid to Stein for `` labor consultant work '' with five unions which organized Leavitt's workers.

Leavitt identified the unions as a warehouseman's local, the teamsters union, a salesman's union, the janitors' union, and a bottling workers' union.

Government attorneys, Leavitt said, have questioned him closely about `` five or six loans '' totaling about $40,000 which the liquor company made to Stein in the last year.

All of the loans, in amounts up to $5,000 each, have been repaid by Stein, according to Leavitt.

Stein said he needed the money, Leavitt said, to `` meet the payroll '' at National Maintenance company.

The deodorant firm run by Pesce has offices in the headquarters of Glimco's discredited taxi drivers' union at 1213-15 Blue Island Av..

The radiation station of the Chicago board of health recorded a reading of 1 micro-microcurie of radiation per cubic meter of air over Chicago yesterday.

The reading, which has been watched with interest since Russia's detonation of a super bomb Monday, was 4 on Tuesday and 7 last Saturday, a level far below the danger point, according to the board of health.

The weather bureau has estimated that radioactive fallout from the test might arrive here next week.

A board of health spokesman said there is no reason to believe that an increase in the level here will occur as a result of the detonation.

Curtis Allen Huff, 41, of 1630 Lake Av., Wilmette, was arrested yesterday on a suppressed federal warrant charging him with embezzling an undetermined amount of money from the First Federal Savings and Loan association, 1 S. Dearborn St., where he formerly was employed as an attorney.

Federal prosecutors estimated that the amount may total $20,000, altho a spokesman for the association estimated its loss at approximately $10,000.

Lien payments involved

Huff's attorney, Antone F. Gregorio, quoted his client as saying that part of the embezzlement represented money paid to Huff, as attorney for the loan association, in satisfaction of mechanic's liens on property on which the association held mortgages.

Huff told Gregorio that he took the money to pay `` the ordinary bills and expenses of suburban living ''.

Huff, who received a salary of $109 a week from the loan association from October of 1955 until September of this year, said that his private practice was not lucrative.

Huff lives with his wife, Sue, and their four children, 6 to 10 years old, in a $25,000 home with a $17,000 mortgage.

Charge lists 3 checks

The complaint on which the warrant was issued was filed by Leo Blaber, an attorney for the association.

The shortage was discovered after Huff failed to report for work on Sept. 18.

On that date, according to Gregorio, Huff left his home and took a room in the New Lawrence hotel at 1020 Lawrence Av..

There, Gregorio said, Huff wrote a complete statement of his offense.

Later, Huff cashed three checks for $100 each at the Sherman House, using a credit card.

All bounced.

When Huff attempted to cash another $100 check there Monday, hotel officials called police.

Bonn, Oct. 24( UPI)

-- Greece and West Germany have ratified an agreement under which Germany will pay $28,700,000 to Greek victims of Nazi persecution, it was announced today.

Probably the hottest thing that has hit the Dallas investment community in years was the Morton Foods stock issue, which was sold to the public during the past week.

For many reasons, the demand to buy shares in the Dallas-headquartered company was tremendous.

It was not a case of the investment bankers having to sell the stock;;

it was more one of allotting a few shares to a number of customers and explaining to others why they had no more to sell.

Investors who wanted 100 shares in many cases ended up with 25, and customers who had put in a bid to buy 400 shares found themselves with 100 and counted themselves lucky to get that many.

In fact, very few customers, anywhere in the nation, were able to get more than 100 shares.

Some Dallas investment firms got only 100 shares, for all of their customers.

A measure of how hot the stock was, can be found in what happened to it on the market as soon as trading began.

The stock was sold in the underwriting at a price of $12.50 a share.

The first over-the-counter trade Wednesday afternoon at Eppler, Guerin& Turner, the managing underwriter, was at $17 a share.

And from that the stock moved right on up until it was trading Thursday morning at around $22 a share.

But the Morton Foods issue was hot long before it was on the market.

Indeed, from the moment the reports of the coming issue first started circulating in Dallas last January, the inquiries and demand for the stock started building up.

Letters by the reams came in from investment firms all over the nation, all of them wanting to get a part of the shares that would be sold( 185,000 to the public at $12.50, with another 5,000 reserved for Morton Foods employes at $11.50 a share).

There was even a cable in French from a bank in Switzerland that had somehow learned about the Dallas stock offering.

`` We subscribe 500 shares of Morton Foods of Texas.

Cable confirmation '', it said translated.

But E.G.T. could not let the Swiss bank have even 10 shares.

After it allotted shares to 41 underwriters and 52 selling group members from coast to coast there were not many shares for anyone.

But the result of it all was, E.G.T. partner Dean Guerin believes, an effective distribution of the stock to owners all over the nation.

`` I feel confident the stock will qualify for the' national list' '', he said, meaning its market price would be quoted regularly in newspapers all over the country.

He was also pleased with the wide distribution because he thought it proved again his argument that Dallas investment men can do just as good a job as the big New York investment bankers claim only they can do.

But what made the Morton Foods stock issue such a hot one??

The answer is that it was a combination of circumstances.

First, the general stock market has been boiling upward for the last few months, driving stocks of all kinds up.

As a result, it is not easy to find a stock priced as the Morton issue was priced( at roughly 10 times 1960 earnings, to yield a little over 5 per cent on the 64-cent anticipated dividend).

Second, the `` potato chip industry '' has caught the fancy of investors lately, and until Morton Foods came along there were only two potato chip stocks -- Frito and H. W. Lay -- on the market.

Both of those have had dynamic run-ups in price on the market in recent months, both were selling at higher price-earnings and yield bases than Morton was coming to market at, and everyone who knew anything about it expected the Morton stock to have a fast run-up.

And third, the potato chip industry has taken on the flavor of a `` growth '' industry in the public mind of late.

Foods, which long had been considered `` recession resistant '' but hardly dynamic stocks, have been acting like growth stocks, going to higher price-earnings ratios.

The potato chip industry these days is growing, not only as a result of population increase and public acceptance of convenience foods, but also because of a combination of circumstances that has led to growth by merger.

The history of the U.S. potato chip industry is that many of today's successful companies got started during the deep depression days.

Those that remain are those that were headed by strong executives, men with the abilities to last almost 30 years in the competitive survival of the fittest.

But today many of those men are reaching retirement age and suddenly realizing that they face an estate tax problem with their closely held companies and also that they have no second-echelon management in their firms.

So they go looking for mergers with other firms that have publicly quoted stock, and almost daily they pound on the doors of firms like Frito.

All those things combined to make the Morton Foods stock the hot issue that it was and is.

Now, if Morton's newest product, a corn chip known as Chip-o's, turns out to sell as well as its stock did, the stock may turn out to be worth every cent of the prices that the avid buyers bid it up to.

Dallas and North Texas is known world-wide as the manufacturing and distribution center of cotton gin machinery and supplies, valued in the millions of dollars.

More than 10 companies maintain facilities in Dallas and one large manufacturer is located to the north at Sherman.

It is no coincidence that the Texas Cotton Ginner's Association is meeting here this week for the 46th time in their 52-year history.

The exhibition of cotton ginning machinery at the State Fair grounds is valued at more than a million dollars.

It weighs in the tons, so the proximity of factory and exhibition area makes it possible for an outstanding exhibit each year.

A modern cotton gin plant costs in the neighborhood of $250,000, and it's a safe assumption that a large percentage of new gins in the U.S. and foreign countries contain machinery made in this area.

The Murray Co. of Texas, Inc., originated in Dallas in 1896.

They've occupied a 22-acre site since the early 1900's.

More than 700 employees make gin machinery that's sold anywhere cotton is grown.

Murray makes a complete line of ginning equipment except for driers and cleaners, and this machinery is purchased from a Dallas-based firm.

The Continental Gin Co. began operations in Dallas in 1899.

The present company is a combination of several smaller ones that date back to 1834.

Headquarters is in Birmingham, Ala..

Factories are located here and in Prattville, Ala..

About 40 per cent of the manufacturing is done at the Dallas plant by more than 200 employes.

The company sells a complete line of gin machinery all over the cotton-growing world.

Hardwicke-Etter Co. of Sherman makes a full line of gin machinery and equipment.

The firm recently expanded domestic sales into the Southeastern states as a result of an agreement with Cen-Tennial Gin Co..

They export also.

The company began operation in 1900 with hardware and oil mill supplies.

In 1930, they began making cotton processing equipment.

Presently, Hardwicke-Etter employs 300-450 people, depending on the season of the year.

The Lummus Cotton Gin Co. has had a sales and service office in Dallas since 1912.

Factory operations are in Columbus, Ga..

The district office here employs about 65.

The Moss Gordin Lint Cleaner Co. and Gordin Unit System of Ginning have joint headquarters here.

The cleaner equipment firm began operations in 1953 and the unit system, which turns out a complete ginning system, began operations in 1959.

Gordin manufacturing operations are in Lubbock.

The John E. Mitchell Co. began work in Dallas in 1928.

The firm is prominent in making equipment for cleaning seed cotton, driers, and heaters, and they lay claim to being the first maker( 1910) of boil extraction equipment.

The increase in mechanical harvesting of cotton makes cleaning and drying equipment a must for modern gin operation.

Mitchell employs a total of about 400 people.

They export cotton ginning machinery.

The Hinckley Gin Supply Co. is a maker of `` overhead equipment ''.

This includes driers, cleaners, burr extractors, separators and piping that's located above gin stands in a complete gin.

The firm began operations back in 1925 and sells equipment in the central cotton belt, including the Mississippi Delta.

The Cen-Tennial Gin Supply Co. has home offices and factory facilities here.

They make gin saws and deal in parts, supplies and some used gin machinery.

The Stacy Co. makes cleaning and drying equipment for sale largely in Texas.

They've been in Dallas since 1921.

Cotton Belt Gin Service, Inc. of Dallas makes gin saws and started here 14 years ago.

They distribute equipment in 11 states.

The firm also handles gin and oil mill supplies such as belting, bearings, etc..

Cotton processing equipment is a sizable segment of Dallas business economy.

New car sales in Dallas County during March showed slight signs of recovering from the doldrums which have characterized sales this year.

Registrations of new cars in Dallas County cracked the 3,000 mark in March for the first time this year.

Totaling 3,399, sales jumped 14 per cent over February's 2,963.

However, compared with March 1960 new car sales of 4,441, this March was off 23 per cent.

On a quarter-to-quarter comparison, the first quarter of 1961 total of 9,273 cars was 21 per cent behind the previous year's 3-month total of 11,744.

This year-to-year decline for Dallas County closely follows the national trend -- estimated sales of domestic cars in the U.S. for first three months of 1961 were about 1,212,000 or 80 per cent of the total in the first quarter a year earlier.

With the March pickup, dealers are optimistic that the April-June quarter will equal or top last year.

The March gain plus this optimism has been encouraging enough to prompt auto makers to boost production schedules for the next quarter.

On the local level, compacts continue to grab a larger share of the market at the expense of lower-priced standard models and foreign cars.

Only three standard models -- Buick, Chrysler, and Mercury -- had slight year-to-year gains in March sales in the county.

The top 3 students from 11 participating Dallas County high schools will be honored by the Dallas Sales Executives Club at a banquet at 6 p.m. Tuesday in the Sam Houston Room of the Sheraton-Dallas Hotel as the club winds up its annual Distributive Education project.

Now in its third year, the program is designed to provide a laboratory for those youngsters seeking careers in marketing and salesmanship.

Business firms provide 20 weeks of practical employment to supplement classroom instruction in these fields.

More than 500 juniors and seniors are taking part in the program and 100 firms offer jobs on an educational rather than a need basis.

Principal address will be delivered by Gerald T. Owens, national sales manager for Isodine Pharmical Corp. of New York.

The 33 honored students are: Mike Trigg, Raymond Arrington, and Ronald Kaminsky of Bryan Adams, Janice Whitney, Fil Terral, and Carl David Page of W. H. Adamson;;

Bill Burke, Tommie Freeman, and Lawrence Paschall of N. R. Crozier Tech. Paulah Thompson, Gerald Kestner, and Nancy Stephenson of Hillcrest;;

Arnold Hayes, Mary Ann Shay, and Lloyd Satterfield of Thomas Jefferson;;

William Cluck, Deloris Carrel Carty, and Edna Earl Eaton of North Dallas;;

Patricia Ann Neal, Johnny Carruthers, and David McLauchlin of Rylie of Seagoville;;

David Wolverton, Sharon Flanagan, and James Weaver of W. W. Samuels;;

William Austin, Gary Hammond, and Ronnie Davis of South Oak Cliff;;

Bill Eaton, Carolyn Milton, and Ronnie Bert Stone of Sunset;;

and Charles Potter, Ronnie Moore, and Robert Bailey of Woodrow Wilson.

The Kennedy administration's new housing and urban renewal proposals, particularly their effect on the Federal Housing Administration, came under fire in Dallas last week.

The Administration's proposals, complex and sweeping as they are, all deal with fringe areas of the housing market rather than its core, stated Caron S. Stallard, first vice-president of the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.

Santa Barbara

-- `` The present recovery movement will gather steady momentum to lift the economy to a new historic peak by this autumn '', Beryl W. Sprinkel, economist of Harris Trust& Savings Bank, Chicago, predicted at the closing session here Tuesday of Investment Bankers Assn., California group, conference.

Another speaker, William H. Draper, Jr., former Under Secretary of the Army and now with the Palo Alto venture capital firm of Draper, Gaither& Anderson, urged the U.S. to `` throw down the gauntlet of battle to communism and tell Moscow bluntly we won't be pushed around any more ''.

He urged support for President Kennedy's requests for both defense and foreign aid appropriations.

' not flash in pan'

Sprinkel told conferees that the recent improvement in economic activity was not a `` temporary flash in the pan '' but the beginning of a substantial cyclical expansion that will carry the economy back to full employment levels and witness a renewal of our traditional growth pattern.

`` In view of the current expansion, which promises to be substantial '' he said the odds appear to favor rising interest rates in coming months, but `` there is reason to believe the change will not be as abrupt as in 1958 nor as severe as in late 1959 and 1960 ''.

Thesis refuted

Sprinkel strongly refuted the current neo-stagnationist thesis that we are facing a future of limited and slow growth, declaring that this pessimism `` is based on very limited and questionable evidence ''.

Rather than viewing the abortive recovery in 1959-60 as a reason for believing we have lost prospects for growth '', he said `` it should be viewed as a lesson well learned which will increase the probability of substantial improvement in this recovery ''.

Danger cited

He cautioned that `` the greater danger in this recovery may be excessive stimulation by government which could bring moderate inflation ''.

The economist does not look for a drastic switch in the budget during this recovery and believes it `` even more unlikely that the Federal Reserve will aggressively tighten monetary policy in the early phases of the upturn as was the case in 1958 ''.

The unsatisfactory 1958-60 expansion, he said, was not due to inadequate growth forces inherent in our economy but rather to the adverse effect of inappropriate economic policies combined with retrenching decisions resulting from the steel strike.

Sacrifices needed

Draper declared, `` As I see it, this country has never faced such great dangers as threaten us today.

We must justify our heritage.

We must be ready for any needed sacrifice ''.

He said that from his experience of two years with Gen. Clay in West Berlin administration, that `` Russia respects our show of strength, but that presently we're not acting as we should and must ''.

He called the Cuban tractor plan an outright blackmail action, and noted that in war `` you can't buy yourself out and that's what we're trying to do ''.

While he declined to suggest, how, he said that sooner or later we must get rid of Castro, `` for unless we do we're liable to face similar situations in this hemisphere.

Its the start of a direct threat to our own security and I don't believe we can permit that ''.

New York( AP)

-- Stock market Tuesday staged a technical recovery, erasing all of Monday's losses in the Associated Press average and making the largest gain in about two weeks.

Analysts saw the move as a continuation of the recovery drive that got under way late Monday afternoon when the list sank to a hoped-for `` support level '' represented by around 675 in the Dow Jones industrial average.

It was a level at which some of the investors standing on the sidelines were thought likely to buy the pivotal issues represented in the averages.

Some good news

Although it looked like a routine technical snapback to Wall Streeters it was accompanied by some good news.

A substantial rise in new orders and sales of durable goods was reported for last month.

Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon said the economy is expected to advance by a whopping 8% next year, paving the way for lower taxes.

The Dow Jones industrial average advanced 7.19 to 687.87.

Of 1,253 issues traded, 695 advanced and 354 declined.

New highs for the year totaled nine and new lows 14.

Trading was comparatively dull throughout the day.

Volume dipped to 3.28 million shares from 3.98 million Monday.

A $25 billion advertising budget in an $800 billion economy was envisioned for the 1970s here Tuesday by Peter G. Peterson, head of one of the world's greatest camera firms, in a key address before the American Marketing Assn..

However, Peterson, president of Bell& Howell, warned 800 U.S. marketing leaders attending a national conference at the Ambassador, that the future will belong to the industrialist of creative and `` unconventional wisdom ''.

Creations needed

`` As we look to the $800 billion economy that is predicted for 1970 and the increase of about 40% in consumer expenditures that will be required to reach that goal, management can well be restless about how this tremendous volume and number of new products will be created and marketed '', Peterson said.

`` With this kind of new product log-jam, the premium for brilliant product planning will obviously go up geometrically ''.

The executive paid tribute to research and development and technology for their great contributions in the past, but he also cautioned industry that they tend to be great equalizers because they move at a fairly even pace within an industry and fail to give it the short-term advantage which it often needs.

Nothing to fear

Peterson said America has nothing to fear in world competition if it dares to be original in both marketing and product ideas.

He cited, as an example, how the American camera industry has been able to meet successfully the competition of Japan despite lower Japanese labor costs, by improving its production know-how and technology.

He also used as an example the manufacturer who introduced an all-automatic camera in Germany, with the result that it became the best selling camera in the German market.

Election of Howard L. Taylor to membership in Pacific Coast Stock Exchange, effective Tuesday, has been announced by Thomas P. Phelan, president of the exchange.

Taylor, president and voting stockholder of Taylor and Co., Beverly Hills, has been active in the securities business since 1925.

Union Oil Co. of California Tuesday offered $120 million in debentures to the public through a group of underwriters headed by Dillon, Read& Co., to raise money to retire a similar amount held by Gulf Oil Corp..

Gulf's holdings could have been converted into 2,700,877 shares of Union Oil common upon surrender of debentures plus cash, according to Union.

Under the new offering, only $60 million in debentures are convertible into 923,076 common shares.

Due in 1986

The new offering Tuesday consisted of $60 million worth of 4-7/8 debentures, due June 1, 1986, at 100%, and $60 million of 4-1/2% convertible subordinated debentures due June 1, 1991, at 100%.

The convertible debentures are convertible into common shares at $65 a share by June 1, 1966;;

$70 by 1971;;

$75 by 1976;;

$80 by 1981;;

$85 by 1986, and $90 thereafter.

New York( AP)

-- American Stock Exchange prices enjoyed a fairly solid rise but here also trading dwindled.

Volume was 1.23 million shares, down from Monday's 1.58 million.

Gains of 2-3/4 were posted for Teleprompter and Republic Foil.

Fairchild Camera and Kawecki Chemical gained 2-1/2 each.

Question

-- I bought 50 shares of Diversified Growth Stock Fund on Oct. 23, 1959, and 50 more shares of the same mutual fund on Feb. 8, 1960.

Something has gone wrong some place.

I am getting dividends on only 50 shares.

In other words, I am getting only half the dividends I should.

Answer

-- Write to the fund's custodian bank -- the First National Bank of Jersey City, N.J..

That bank handles most of the paper work for Diversified Growth Stock Fund, Fundamental Investors, Diversified Investment Fund and Television-Electronics Fund.

The bank installed a magnetic tape electronic data processing system to handle things.

But it seems that this `` electronic brain '' wasn't `` programmed '' correctly.

This resulted in a great number of errors.

And letters began to come in to this column from irate shareholders.

I visited the bank in March and wrote a story about the situation.

At that time, the people at the bank said they felt that they had the situation in hand.

They indicated that no new errors were being made and that all old errors would be corrected `` within 60 days ''.

That 60-day period is over and letters are still coming in from shareholders of these four funds, complaining about mistakes in their accounts.

Maybe it's taking longer to get things squared away than the bankers expected.

Any shareholder of any of these funds who finds a mistake in his account certainly should get in touch with the bank.

Doyle cannot undertake to reply to inquiries.

He selects queries or general interest to answer.

Washington( AP)

-- Alfred Hayes, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said Tuesday `` there is no present need for far-reaching reforms '' which would basically alter the international financial system.

Hayes said that if a way can be found to deal effectively with short-term capital movements between nations, `` there is no reason, in my judgment why the international financial system cannot work satisfactorily for at least the foreseeable future ''.

Washington( UPI)

-- New York Central Railroad president Alfred E. Perlman said Tuesday his line would face the threat of bankruptcy if the Chesapeake& Ohio and Baltimore& Ohio Railroads merge.

Perlman said bankruptcy would not be an immediate effect of the merger, but could possibly be an ultimate effect.

The railroad president made the statement in an interview as the Interstate Commerce Commission opened Round 2 of its hearing into the C& O's request to control and then merge with the B& Aj.

`` All these kind of things weaken us '', Perlman said.

Bad condition

Board Chairman Howard Simpson of the Baltimore& Ohio Railroad Co., testified the B& O was in its worst financial condition since the depression years and badly needed the economic lift it would get from consolidation with the Chesapeake& Ohio Railroad.

`` The financial situation of the Baltimore& Ohio, has become precarious -- much worse than at any time since the depression of the 1930s '', he told the hearing.

C& O president Walter J. Tuohy was summoned back for cross-examination by New York Central attorneys before examiner John Bradford who is hearing the complex case.

The New York Central also has asked the ICC to permit it to gain control of the B& Aj.

Central was rebuffed by the other two railroads in previous attempts to make it a three-way merger.

The proposed C& O-B& O railroad would make it the hemisphere's second largest.

Washington( AP)

-- The government's short-term borrowing costs rose with Tuesday's weekly offering of Treasury bills.

On $1.1 billion of 90-day bills, the average yield was 2.325%.

The rate a week ago was 2.295%.

Washington, March 11( UPI).

-- `` Consumer uncertain about economic conditions ''.

This was the chief reason for a so-so sales outlook given by two-thirds of 56 builders polled by the National Housing Center.

Other reasons mentioned by one-third or more of the builders were `` resistance to high interest rates, cost advantage of buying over renting has narrowed, shelter market nearing saturation and prospects unable to qualify ''.

Increase expected

The poll was taken at the Center's annual builders' intentions conference.

It disclosed that the builders:

Expect their own production volume, and presumably sales, to jump 30 percent in 1961.

Look for home building nationally to advance less than 10 percent this year from 1960's 1,257,700 non-farm housing starts.

The industry has said 1960 was a poor year.

Starts were down 20 percent from 1959.

Why the discrepancy between the builders' forecasts for themselves and for the industry??

Leaders of industry

The reason, says the Housing Center, is that the builders invited to the intentions conference `` are generally among the more successful businessmen, and usually do somewhat better than their fellow builders ''.

Elburn, Ill.

-- Farm machinery dealer Bob Houtz tilts back in a battered chair and tells of a sharp pickup in sales: `` We've sold four corn pickers since Labor Day and have good prospects for 10 more.

We sold only four pickers all last year ''.

Gus Ehlers, competitor of Mr. Houtz in this farm community, says his business since August 1 is running 50% above a year earlier.

`` Before then, my sales during much of the year had lagged behind 1960 by 20% '', he says.

Though the sales gains these two dealers are experiencing are above average for their business, farm equipment sales are climbing in most rural areas.

Paradoxically, the sales rise is due in large measure to Government efforts to slash farm output.

Although the Administration's program cut crop acreage to the lowest point since 1934, farmers, with the help of extra fertilizer and good weather, are getting such high yields per acre that many are being forced to buy new harvesting machines.

Fields of corn and some other crops in many cases are so dense that older equipment cannot handle them efficiently.

The higher price supports provided by the new legislation, together with rising prices for farm products, are pushing up farm income, making it possible for farmers to afford the new machinery.

Seven of the eight companies that turn out full lines of farm machinery say sales by their dealers since the start of August have shown gains averaging nearly 10% above last year.

`` In August our dealers sold 13% more farm machinery than a year earlier and in September retail sales were 14% higher than last year '', says Mark V. Keeler, farm equipment vice president of International Harvester Co..

For the year to date, sales of the company's farm equipment dealers still lag about 5% behind 1960.

Two of three report gains

Among individual dealers questioned in nearly a score of states, two out of three report their sales since August 1 show sizable gains from a year earlier, with the increases ranging from 5% to 50%.

Not all sections are showing an upswing, however;;

the drought-seared North Central states are the most notable exceptions to the uptrend.

The significance of the pickup in farm machinery sales extends beyond the farm equipment industry.

The demand for farm machinery is regarded as a yardstick of rural buying generally.

Farmers spend more of their income on tractors and implements than on any other group of products.

More than 20 million people live on farms and they own a fourth of the nation's trucks, buy more gasoline than any other industry and provide a major market for home appliances, chemicals and other products.

Farmers are so eager for new machinery that they're haggling less over prices than they did a year ago, dealers report.

`` Farmers aren't as price conscious as last year so we can get more money on a sale '', says Jack Martin, who sells J. I. Case tractors and implements in Sioux City, Iowa.

`` This morning, we allowed a farmer $600 on the old picker he traded in on a new $2,700 model.

Last year, we probably would have given him $700 for a comparable machine ''.

Mr. Martin sold 21 tractors in August;;

in August of 1960, he sold seven.

Dealers' stocks down

With dealer stocks of new equipment averaging about 25% below a year ago, the affects of the rural recovery are being felt almost immediately by the country's farm equipment manufacturers.

For example, farm equipment shipments of International Harvester in August climbed about 5% above a year earlier, Mr. Keeler reports.

Tractor production at Massey-Ferguson, Ltd., of Toronto in July and August rose to 2,418 units from 869 in the like period a year earlier, says John Staiger, vice president.

With the lower dealer inventories and the stepped-up demand some manufacturers believe there could be shortages of some implements.

Merritt D. Hill, Ford Motor Co. vice president, says his company is starting to get calls daily from dealers demanding immediate delivery or wanting earlier shipping dates on orders for corn pickers.

Except for a few months in late 1960 and early 1961, retail farm equipment sales have trailed year-earlier levels since the latter part of 1959.

The rise in sales last winter was checked when the Government's new feed grain program was adopted;;

the program resulted in a cutback of around 20% in planted acreage and, as a result, reduced the immediate need for machines.

Nearly all of the farm equipment manufacturers and dealers say the upturn in sales has resulted chiefly from the recent improvement in crop prospects.

Total farm output for this year is officially forecast at 129% of the 1947-49 average, three points higher than the July 1 estimate and exactly equal to the final figure for 1960.

The Government also is aiding farmers' income prospects.

Agriculture Department economists estimate the Government this year will hand farmers $1.4 billion in special subsidies and incentive payments, well above the record $1.1 billion of 1958 and about double the $639 million of 1960.

Price support loans may total another $1 billion this year.

With cash receipts from marketings expected to be slightly above 1960, farmers' gross income is estimated at $39.5 billion, $1.5 billion above 1960's record high.

Net income may reach $12.7 billion, up $1 billion from 1960 and the highest since 1953.

The Government reported last week that the index of prices received by farmers rose in the month ended at mid-September for the third consecutive month, reaching 242% of the 1910-14 average compared with 237% at mid-July.

Kennedy opposes any widespread relief from a High Court depletion ruling.

The Supreme Court decision in mid-1960 was in the case of a company making sewer pipe from clay which it mined.

The company, in figuring its taxable earnings, deducted a percentage of the revenue it received for its finished products.

Such `` depletion allowances '', in the form of percentages of sales are authorized by tax law for specified raw materials producers using up their assets.

The High Court held that the company must apply its percentage allowance to the value of the raw materials removed from the ground, not to the revenue from finished products.

A measure passed by Congress just before adjourning softened the ruling's impact, on prior-year returns still under review, for clay-mining companies that make brick and tile products.

The measure allows such companies in those years to apply their mineral depletion allowances to 50% of the value of the finished products rather than the lower value of raw clay alone.

President Kennedy, in signing the relief measure into law, stressed he regarded it as an exception.

`` My approval of this bill should not be viewed as establishing a precedent for the enactment of similar legislation for other mineral industries '', the President said.

Charitable deductions come in for closer scrutiny by the I.R.S..

The Service announced that taxpayers making such claims may be called on to furnish a statement from the recipient organization showing the date, purpose, amount and other particulars of the contribution.

Requests for substantiation, the Service indicated, can be especially expected in cases where it suspects the donor received some material benefit in return, such as tickets to a show.

In such an instance, revenuers stressed, the deduction must be reduced by the value of the benefit received.

A rule on the Federal deductibility of state taxes is contested.

A realty corporation in Louisiana owed no tax, under Federal law, on its gain from the sale of property disposed of in line with a plan of liquidation.

Louisiana, however, collected an income tax on the profits from the sale.

The corporation, in filing its final Federal income return, claimed the state tax payment as a deductible expense, as permitted under U.S. tax law.

The Revenue Service disallowed the claim, invoking a law provision that generally bars deductions for expenses incurred in connection with what it said was tax-exempt income.

The Tax Court rejected this view.

It said the tax-freedom of the gain in this case stemmed not from the exempt status of the income but from a special rule on corporate liquidations.

The Tax Court decision and a similar earlier finding by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals challenges a year-old I.R.S. ruling on the subject.

The Service has not said what its next step will be.

Peace Corps volunteers are assured a tax benefit under the law creating the agency.

It provides that the $1,800 termination payment each cadet is to get, after serving a two-year hitch without pay, will be spread over both years, not taxed in its entirety at a possibly higher rate in the year received.

The owner of a public relations firm owed no income tax on payments he received from a client company and `` kicked back '' to the company's advertising manager, the Tax Court ruled.

The taxpayer testified that in order to retain the account he had to pad his invoices and pay the excess to the manager.

The Court upheld the taxpayer's contention that these `` kickbacks '' were not his income though they passed through his hands.

The Court limited its decision to the tax issue involved, commenting: `` It is not our province to pass judgment on the morality of the transaction ''.

A portable kerosene range designed for use aboard boats is sold with a special railing to keep it from moving with the motion of the vessel.

The Revenue Service said the addition of the attachment does not keep the range from coming under the Federal manufacturers' excise tax on household-type appliances.

Hiring the wife for one's company may win her tax-aided retirement income.

A spouse employed by a corporation her husband controls, for example, may be entitled to distributions under the company's pension plan as well as to her own Social Security coverage.

She would be taxed on the pensions when received, of course, but the company's contributions would be tax-free.

A frequent pitfall in this sort of arrangement, experts warn, is a tendency to pay the wife more than her job is worth and to set aside an excessive amount for her as retirement income.

In that event, they note, the Revenue Service might declare the pension plan is discriminatory and deny it tax privileges under the law.

Possible upshots: The company could be denied a deduction for its pension payments, or those payments for the wife and other employes could be ruled taxable to them in the year made.

State briefs: Voters in four counties containing and bordering Denver authorized the imposition of an additional 2% sales tax within that area.

Colorado has a 2% sales tax.

Denver itself collects a 1% sales tax which is to be absorbed in the higher area tax.

The Washington state supreme court ruled that the state's occupation tax applied to sales, made at cost to an oil company, by a wholly-owned subsidiary set up to purchase certain supplies without divulging the identity of the parent.

The state's occupation tax is computed on gross sales.

The court held that the tax applied to non-profit sales because the corporations realized economic benefits by doing business as two separate entities.

Washington

-- Consumer spending edged down in April after rising for two consecutive months, the Government reported.

The Commerce Department said seasonally adjusted sales of retail stores dropped to slightly under $18 billion in April, down 1% from the March level of more than $18.2 billion.

April sales also were 5% below those of April last year, when volume reached a record for any month, $18.9 billion( see chart on Page One).

The seasonal adjustment takes into account such factors as Easter was on April 2 this year, two weeks earlier than in 1960, and pre-Easter buying was pushed into March.

Commerce Department officials were inclined to explain the April sales decline as a reaction from a surge of consumer buying in March.

Adjusted sales that month were up a relatively steep 2.5% from those of the month before, which in turn were slightly higher than the January low of $17.8 billion.

Greer Garson, world-famous star of stage, screen and television, will be honored for the high standard in tasteful sophisticated fashion with which she has created a high standard in her profession.

As a Neiman-Marcus award winner the titian-haired Miss Garson is a personification of the individual look so important to fashion this season.

She will receive the 1961 `` Oscar '' at the 24th annual Neiman-Marcus Exposition, Tuesday and Wednesday in the Grand Ballroom of the Sheraton-Dallas Hotel.

The only woman recipient, Miss Garson will receive the award with Ferdinando Sarmi, creator of chic, beautiful women's fashions;;

Harry Rolnick, president of the Byer-Rolnick Hat Corporation and designer of men's hats;;

Sydney Wragge, creator of sophisticated casuals for women and Roger Vivier, designer of Christian Dior shoes Paris, France, whose squared toes and lowered heels have revolutionized the shoe industry.

The silver and ebony plaques will be presented at noon luncheons by Stanley Marcus, president of Neiman-Marcus, Beneficiary of the proceeds from the two showings will be the Dallas Society for Crippled Children Cerebral Palsy Treatment Center.

The attractive Greer Garson, who loves beautiful clothes and selects them as carefully as she does her professional roles, prefers timeless classical designs.

Occasionally she deserts the simple and elegant for a fun piece simply because `` It's unlike me ''.

In private life, Miss Garson is Mrs. E. E. Fogelson and on the go most of the time commuting from Dallas, where they maintain an apartment, to their California home in Los Angeles' suburban Bel-Air to their ranch in Pecos, New Mexico.

Therefore, her wardrobe is largely mobile, to be packed at a moment's notice and to shake out without a wrinkle.

Her creations in fashion are from many designers because she doesn't want a complete wardrobe from any one designer any more than she wants `` all of her pictures by one painter ''.

A favorite is Norman Norell, however.

She likes his classic chemise.

Her favorite cocktail dress is a Norell, a black and white organdy and silk jersey.

Irene suits rate high because they are designed for her long-bodied silhouette.

She also likes the femininity and charm of designs by Ceil Chapman and Helen Rose.

Balenciaga is her favorite European designer.

`` I bought my first dress from him when I was still a struggling young actress '', she reminisces.

`` I like his clothes for their drama and simplicity and appreciate the great impact he has on fashion ''.

Black and white is her favorite color combination along with lively glowing pinks, reds, blues and greens.

Of Scotch-Irish-Scandinavian descent, Greer Garson was born in County Down, Ireland.

Her mother was a Greer and her father's family came from the Orkney Isles.

Reared in England, she studied to be a teacher, earned several scholarships and was graduated with honors from the University of London.

She took postgraduate work at the University of Grenoble in France and then returned to London to work on market research with an advertising firm.

Her acting began with the Birmingham Repertory Company and she soon became the toast of the West End.

Among stage performances was a starring role in `` Golden Arrow '' directed by Noel Coward.

It was during `` Old Music '' at the St. James Theater that Hollywood's Louis B. Mayer spotted her.

After signing a motion-picture contract, she came to America and had `` Goodbye, Mr. Chips '' as her first assignment after a year's wait.

Other triumphs include `` Random Harvest '', `` Madame Curie '', `` Pride and Prejudice '', `` The Forsythe Saga '' and `` Mrs. Miniver ''( which won her the Academy Award in 1943).

Honors that have come to Greer Garson are countless.

Just this April she was nominated for the seventh time for an Academy Award for her portrayal of Eleanor Roosevelt in `` Sunrise at Campobello ''.

She gave a fine portrayal of Auntie Mame on Broadway in 1958 and has appeared in live television from `` Captain Brassbound's Conversion '' to `` Camille ''.

She is in Madame Tussard's Waxworks in London, a princess of the Kiowa tribe and an honorary colonel in many states.

She is adept at skeet shooting, trout fishing, Afro-Cuban and Oriental dancing and Southwestern archaeology.

She now serves on the board of directors of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra and the Dallas Theater Center and on the board of trustees of the Dallas Museum of Fine Arts.

She is state chairman for the New Mexico Tuberculosis and Cancer Associations.

Both Miss Garson and her oilman-rancher husband are active supporters of Boys Clubs of America and patrons of the vivid art and opera colony that flourishes in New Mexico.

Back in college, today's handsome Gander was the only male member of a Texas Tech class on food.

The pretty coeds must have ogled him all day long -- but he dutifully kept his eye on the gravy.

Last October he gave a public speech in Washington, D.C. entitled `` Are Women Here To Stay ''??

So you can see that Gerald G. Ramsey, director of SMU's food services, is not the ordinary type of craven, women-trodden chef.

He is apt to rear back and claim his rights.

Ramsey, as SMU's food wrangler, buys enough groceries to serve 32,000 meals a week.

Tell that to the little wife when she moans at the woman's burden!!

He also dishes up 3,000 snacks.

And he operates three cafeterias in the Student Center, along with McElvaney Dining Hall and the athlete's tables.

Ramsey, 6-3, 195 and ruggedly slim, says, `` I can't remember when I didn't pester my mother to teach me to cook ''.

He was in charge of the Hockaday School meals from 1946 to 1950, before he moved to Aj.

And you'll notice that in both places, there are acres of charming young ladies who with little effort spice up any chow line.

What does he feed his SMU football mastodons at the training table??

`` Mostly meat and potatoes -- they have to have that go-go-go without getting too fat '', says Ramsey.

So he hides the mayonnaise.

And to keep athletes' stomachs from getting jumpy under physical duress, he bans all highly flavored condiments.

What do the pretty SMU girls like on their plates??

`` Pretty much hamburger, hotdogs, steak and, at night, maybe pizza '', says the handsome food expert.

`` Unfortunately, there is still little demand for broccoli and cauliflower ''.

Ramsey has stoked up Harry Truman, Henry Cabot Lodge, the King of Morocco, Clement Atlee and other shiny characters.

Once four Tibetan monks, in their saffron robes, filed through the cafeteria line.

`` They aren't supposed to look at women, you know '', Ramsey recalled.

`` What with all those pretty girls around, they had a hard time ''.

Chicken Cadillac

Use one 6-ounce chicken breast for each guest.

Salt and pepper each breast.

Dip in melted butter and roll in flour.

Place side by side in a 2-inch deep baking pan.

Bake slowly about one hour at 250-275 F. until lightly brown.

Add enough warmed cream, seasoned to taste with onion juice, to about half cover the chicken breasts.

Bake slowly at least one-half hour longer.

While this is baking, saute mushrooms, fresh or canned, in butter.

Sprinkle over top of chicken breasts.

Serve each breast on a thin slice of slow-baked ham and sprinkle with Thompson seedless grapes.

( Leave off the ham and you call it Chicken Pontiac, says Ramsey.

)

Contemporary furniture that is neither Danish nor straight-line modern but has sculptured pattern, many design facets, warmth, dignity and an effect of utter comfort and livability.

That is the goal of two new collections being introduced in Dallas this month.

Though there has been some avant garde indication that contemporary furniture might go back to the boxy look of the '20's and '40's, two manufacturers chose to take the approach of the sophisticated, but warm look in contemporary.

These two, Heritage and Drexel, chose too not to produce the exactly matching design for every piece, but a collection of correlated designs, each of which could stand alone.

The Heritage collection, to be shown by Sanger-Harris and Anderson's Studio, has perhaps more different types of woods and decorations than any one manufacturer ever assembled together at one time.

Called Perennian, to indicate its lasting, good today and tomorrow quality, the collection truly avoids the monotony of identical pieces.

Walnut, wormy chestnut, pecan, three varieties of burl, hand-woven Philippine cane, ceramic tiles, marble are used to emphasize the feeling of texture and of permanence, the furniture to fit into rooms with tiled floors, brick or paneled walls, windows that bring in the outdoors.

It is a collection with a custom-design look, offering simplicity with warmth, variety and vitality.

The Drexel collection, called Composite, to be shown by Titche's offers a realistic approach to decorating, a mature modern that is a variation of many designs.

Rounded posts give a soft, sculptured look, paneled doors have decorative burl panels or cane insets plus softening arches, table tops are inlaid in Macassar ebony or acacia.

A high-legged buffet provides easy-to-reach serving, a cocktail table has small snack tables tucked under each end, recessed arched panels decorate a 60-inch long chest.

An interesting approach to the bedroom is presented, with a young, basic, functional group of chests, dressers and corner units and a canted headboard.

The other bedroom has heavier styling, door-fronted dressers with acacia panels, a poster bed or a bed with arched acacia panels and matching mirror.

Colorful, bright Eastman Chromspun fabrics, with the magenta, pink and white tones predominating as well as golden shades are used with Composite.

The fabrics have Scotchgard finish to resist soil and wrinkles.

Design elements closely rooted to traditional forms but wearing a definite contemporary label keynote Drexel's fall 1961 group, Composite.

The spider-leg pedestal table has a base finished in an ebony, to set off the lustrous brown of the walnut top.

See-through design of the chairs combines both the nostalgic ladder back and an Oriental shoji flavor.

To bring warmth to the dining area, golden orange tones are used in the fabrics.

Dignity and comfort, in a contemporary manner, reflecting the best aspects of today's design, with substance and maturity, keynote the Perennian collection from Heritage.

Center panel, hand-screened wood, actually is a back of one of the tall bookcases.

Mellow bronzy-green-gold fabrics and the gleam of copper and hand-crafted ceramic accessories reiterate the mood as does the Alexander Smith carpet in all wool loop pile.

The Vagabonds are `` on the road '' again.

Members are on their way to Saledo, not by stage coach, but in air-conditioned cars.

This coming weekend they have reserved the entire Stagecoach Inn and adjoining country club, Saledo, for festivities.

Invitations have been extended to some Austin dignitaries including Gov. and Mrs. Price Daniel.

Stagecoach Days is the theme for the weekend on the Old Chisholm Trail.

The get-together Friday night will be a banquet at the country club patio and pool, and an orchestra will play for dancing.

Guests will wear costumes typical of the Chisholm Trail Days.

Ginghams and calico will be popular dress for the women.

The men will be in western attire, including Stetsons and colored vests.

Decorating the ballroom will be the yellow rose of Texas, in tall bushes;;

bluebonnets and stagecoach silhouettes.

There will be a large drawing of a sunbonnet girl with eyes that flash at the guests.

Mr. and Mrs. Phil G. Abell are chairmen for the Saledo trip.

Committee members aiding them in planning the entertainment are Messrs and Mmes Roy McKee, George McElyee, Jack Fanning, W. H. Roquemore and Joe Darrow.

The travel club is comprised of 75 fun-loving couples who have as their motto `` Go Somewhere, Anywhere, Everywhere ''.

Their activities will be climaxed in the spring of 1962 when they go to Europe.

In the past, the men and women have chartered planes to Las Vegas and Jamaica, buses to Mineral Wells and Kerrville and private railway coaches to Shreveport and Galveston.

Four parties are given a year.

Two of these are in or near Dallas and the others away from the vicinity.

Serving on the club's board are Mmes R. P. Anderson, president;;

A. F. Schmalzried, secretary;;

W. H. Roquemore, treasurer, and the following chairmen: Mmes McKee, publicity;;

Lawrence B. Jones, yearbook, and Sam Laughlin, scrapbook.

A cookie with caramel filling and chocolate frosting won $25,000 for a Minneapolis housewife in the 13th annual Pillsbury Bake-Off Tuesday.

Mrs. Alice H. Reese, wife of an engineer and mother of a 23-year-old son, was awarded the top prize at a luncheon in the Beverly Hilton Hotel.

Mrs. Reese entered 10 past bake-offs before she got into the finals.

Second grand prize of $5,000 went to Mrs. Clara L. Oliver for her Hawaiian coffee ring, a rich yeast bread with coconut filling and vanilla glaze.

Mother of five

Mrs. Oliver is mother of five children and wife of a machinist.

She lives in Wellsville, Mo..

Mrs. Reese baked her cookies for only the third time in the Bake-off finals.

And the third time was the charm.

She dreamed up the cookie recipe, tried it, liked it and entered it in the contest.

The second baking was for photographing when told she was a finalist.

The third time was on the floor of the Beverly Hilton ballroom and for the critical eyes and tongues of judges.

Mr. and Mrs. Joseph R. Bolker will give a dinner on Friday at their home in Beverly Hills to honor Mrs. Norman Chandler, chairman of the Music Center Building Fund Committee, and Mr. Chandler.

Mr. Bolker heads a group within the building and development industry to raise funds in support of this cultural center for the performing arts.

A feature of the party will be a presentation by Welton Becket, center architect, of color slides and renderings of the three-building complex.

Foliage will glow at formal fall party

Fall foliage and flowers will decorate Los Angeles Country Club for the annual formal party Saturday evening.

More than 200 are expected at the autumn event which is matched in the spring.

Among those with reservations are Messrs. and Mmes. William A. Thompson, Van Cott Niven, A. B. Cox, David Bricker, Samuel Perry and Robert D. Stetson.

Others are Drs. and Mmes. Alfred Robbins, and J. Lafe Ludwig and Gen. and Mrs. Leroy Watson.

Guests from across U.S. honor Dr. Swim

When Dr. W. A. Swim celebrated his 75th birthday at the Wilshire Country Club, guests came by chartered plane from all over the country.

A flight originating in Florida picked up guests on the East Coast and Midwest and a plane left from Seattle taking on passengers at West Coast points.

Cocktails and a buffet supper were served to more than 100 persons who had known Dr. Swim when he practiced in Los Angeles.

He started practice in 1917, and served on the State Board of Medical Examiners.

Giving up the violin opened a whole new career for Ilona Schmidl-Seeberg, a tiny Hungarian who Fritz Kreisler had predicted would have a promising career on the concert stage.

A heart attack when she was barely 20 put an end to the 10-hour daily practicing.

She put the violin away and took out some linen, needles and yarn to while away the long, idle days in Budapest.

Now her modern tapestries have been exhibited on two continents and, at 26, she feels she is on the threshold of a whole new life in Los Angeles.

Her days as an art student at the University of Budapest came to a sudden end during the Hungarian uprisings in 1957 and she and her husband Stephen fled to Vienna.

There they continued their studies at the university, she in art, he in architecture.

And there she had her first showing of tapestry work.

There's a lot of talk about the problem of education in America today.

What most people don't seem to realize, if they aren't tied up with the thing as I am, is that 90% of the problem is transportation.

I never dreamed of the logistical difficulties involved until, at long last, both of my boys got squeezed into high school.

It seems like only last year that we watched them set out up the hill hand in hand on a rainy day in their yellow raincoats to finger-paint at the grammar school.

Getting to and from school was no problem.

They either walked or were driven.

Now they go to a high school that is two miles away.

One might think the problem would be similar.

They could walk, ride on a bus or be driven.

It's much more complex than that.

Generally, they go to school with a girl named Gloriana, who lives down the block, and has a car.

This is a way of getting to school, but, I understand, it entails a certain loss of social status.

A young man doesn't like to be driven up in front of a school in a car driven by a girl who isn't even in a higher class than he is, and is also a girl.

`` Why don't you walk to school then ''??

I suggested.

`` My father walked, through two miles of snow, in Illinois ''.

`` Did you ''??

I was asked.

`` No '', I said, `` I didn't happen to grow up in Illinois ''.

I explained, however, that I had my share of hardship in making my daily pilgrimage to the feet of wisdom.

I had to ride a streetcar two miles.

Sometimes the streetcar was late.

Sometimes there weren't even any seats.

I had to stand up, with the ladies.

Sometimes I got on the wrong car and didn't get to school at all, but wound up at the ocean, or some other dismal place, and had to spend the day there.

I've tried to compromise by letting them take the little car now and then.

When they do that my wife has to drive me to work in the big car.

She has to have at least one car herself.

I feel a certain loss of status when I am driven up in front of work in a car driven by my wife, who is only a woman.

Even that isn't satisfactory.

If they have to take any car, they'd rather take the big one.

They say that when they take a car, Gloriana doesn't take her car, but rides with them.

But when Gloriana rides with them they also have to take the two girls who usually ride with her, so the little car isn't big enough.

The logic of that is impeccable, of course, except that I feel like a fool being driven up to work in a little car, by my wife, when everybody knows I have a big car and am capable of driving myself.

The solution, naturally, is the bus.

However, it's a half-mile walk down a steep hill from our house to the bus, and it's too hard on my legs.

My wife could drive us down the hill and we could all walk from there.

But that's hardly realistic.

Nobody walks anymore but crackpots and Harry Truman, and he's already got an education.

Advance publicity on the Los Angeles Blue Book does not mention names dropped as did the notices for the New York Social Register which made news last week.

Published annually by William Hord Richardson, the 1962 edition, subtitled Society Register of Southern California, is scheduled to arrive with Monday morning's postman.

Publisher Richardson has updated the Blue Book `` but it still remains the compact reference book used by so many for those ever-changing telephone numbers, addresses, other residences, club affiliations and marriages ''.

Stars for marriage

Stars throughout the volume denote dates of marriages during the past year.

Last two to be added before the book went to press were the marriages of Meredith Jane Cooper, daughter of the Grant B. Coopers, to Robert Knox Worrell, and of Mary Alice Ghormley to Willard Pen Tudor.

Others are Carla Ruth Craig to Dan McFarland Chandler Jr.;;

Joanne Curry, daughter of the Ellsworth Currys, to James Hartley Gregg, and Valerie Smith to James McAlister Duque.

Also noted are the marriages of Elizabeth Browning, daughter of the George L. Brownings, to Austin C. Smith Jr.;;

Cynthia Flower, daughter of the Ludlow Flowers Jr., to Todd Huntington, son of the David Huntingtons.

Pasadena listings

Listed as newly wed in the Pasadena section of the new book are Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Moody Haskins 3.

She is the former Judy Chapman, daughter of John S. Chapman of this city.

The young couple live in Pasadena.

Another marriage of note is that of Jane McAlester and William Louis Pfau.

Changes in address are noted.

For instance, the Edwin Pauleys Jr., formerly of Chantilly Rd., are now at home on North Arden Dr. in Beverly Hills.

Mr. and Mrs. Robert Moulton now live on Wilshire and the Franklin Moultons on S. Windsor Blvd..

The Richard Beesemyers, formerly of Connecticut, have returned to Southern California and are now residing on South Arden Blvd..

But the Raoul Esnards have exchanged their residence in Southern California for Mexico City.

More new addresses

Judge and Mrs. Julian Hazard are now at Laguna Beach, while the Frank Wangemans have moved from Beverly Hills to New York, where he is general manager of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

And Lawrence Chase, son of the Ransom Chases, is listed at his new address in Oxford, Eng..

Others listed at new addresses are the Richard T. Olerichs, the Joseph Aderholds Jr., the Henri De La Chapelles, the John Berteros and Dr. and Mrs. Egerton Crispin, the John Armisteads, the Allen Chases, the Howard Lockies, the Thomas Lockies, and Anthony Longinotti.

Newcomers of social note from other parts of the country are the Ray Carbones, formerly of Panama;;

the Geddes MacGregors, formerly of Scotland, and Mr. and Mrs. Werner H. Althaus, formerly of Switzerland.

Here's an idea for a child's room that is easy to execute and is completely charming, using puppets for lamp bases.

Most children love the animated puppet faces and their flexible bodies, and they prefer to see them as though the puppets were in action, rather than put away in boxes.

Displayed as lamps, the puppets delight the children and are decorative accent.

To create such a lamp, order a wired pedestal from any lamp shop.

Measure the puppet to determine the height of the light socket, allowing three to four inches above the puppet's head.

Make sure that the metal tube through which the wire passes is in the shape of an inverted `` L '', the foot of the `` L '' about three inches long, so that the puppet can hang directly under the light.

Pulling strings

Using the strings that manipulate the puppet, suspend him from the light fixture by tying the strings to the lamp base.

In this way, you can arrange his legs and arms in any desired position, with feet, or one foot, barely resting on the pedestal.

If the puppets are of uniform size, you can change them in accord with your child's whims.

Although a straight drum shade would be adequate and sufficiently neutral that the puppets could be changed without disharmony, it is far more fun to create shades in the gay spirit of a child's playtime.

Those illustrated are reminiscent of a circus top or a merry-go-round.

The scalloped edge is particularly appealing.

Today's trend toward furniture designs from America's past is teaching home-owners and decorators a renewed respect for the shrewd cabinetmakers of our Colonial era.

A generation ago there were plenty of people who appreciated antiques and fine reproductions.

In the background lurked the feeling, however, that these pieces, beautiful as they were, lacked the utilitarian touch.

So junior's bedroom was usually tricked out with heavy, nondescript pieces that supposedly could take the `` hard knocks '', while the fine secretary was relegated to the parlor where it was for show only.

This isn't true of the many homemakers of the 1960's, according to decorator consultant, Leland Alden.

Housewives are finding literally hundreds of ways of getting the maximum use out of traditional designs, says Mr. Alden and they are doing it largely because Colonial craftsmen had `` an innate sense of the practical ''.

Solid investment

There are a number of reasons why the Eighteenth Century designer had to develop `` down to earth '' designs -- or go out of business.

Hotel Escape's Bonanza room has a real bonanza in its new attraction, the versatile `` Kings 4, Plus Two ''.

This is the strongest act to hit the area in a long while -- a well integrated, fast moving outfit specializing in skits, vocals, comedy and instrumentals all of it distinctly displaying the pro touch.

Show spotlights the Kings -- George Worth, Bill Kay, Frank Ciciulla and Gene Wilson, flanked by Dave Grossman and Ron Stevens.

The Plus Two remain at a fixed position with drums and guitar but the quartet covers the stage with a batch of instruments ranging from tuba to tambourine, and the beat is solid.

In the comedy division, the Kings simply augment talent and imagination with a few props.

Net result is some crazy-wonderful nonsense, part of which can be classed as pure slapstick.

Kings 4, have rated as a popular act in Vegas and Western nightclubs.

If they can't chalk up big business here then let's stop this noise about how hip we are, and stick to our community singing,

elsewhere

Andy Bartha and his trio have booked into Oceania Lounge.

The Cumbancheros, Latin combo, open Tuesday at the Four O'Clock Club.

`` Flip '' Phillips for a return engagement at Fireside Steak Ranch Wednesday;;

same date, Johnny LaSalle trio to the Jolly Roger.

Dick Carroll and his accordion( which we now refer to as `` Freida '') held over at Bahia Cabana where `` Sir '' Judson Smith brings in his calypso capers Oct. 13.

Johnny Leighton picked up some new numbers out in Texas which he's springing on the ringsiders in the Rum House at Galt Ocean Mile Hotel.

`` Skip '' Hovarter back in town from a summer in the Reno-Lake Tahoe area where he ran into Rusty Warren, Kay Martin, the Marskmen and Tune Toppers -- all pulling good biz, he says.

We like Fike

Al Fike, an ex-schoolteacher from Colorado, is currently pursuing the three R's -- rhythm, reminiscence and repartee -- in a return class session at the Trade Winds Hotel.

Al has added some sidemen to the act which makes for a smoother operation but it's substantially the same format heard last spring.

Newcomers are Ernie Kemm on piano, Wes Robbins, bass and trumpet, and Jack Kelly on drums.

It's a solid show but, except for some interim keyboarding by Ernie, it's Al's all the way.

Maestro's biggest stock in trade is his personality, and ability to establish a warm rapport with his audience.

He skips around from jazz, to blues to boogie -- accompanying himself on piano and frequently pulling the customers in on the act.

This is a bouncy show which may get a little too frantic at times, but is nevertheless worth your appraisal.

New owners

Cafe Society opens formally this afternoon under its new ownership.

George Kissak is the bossman;;

Terry Barnes has been named manager.

Spot retains the same decor although crystal chandeliers have been installed above the terrace dining area, and the kitchen has undergone a remodeling job.

Latter domain, under the guidance of Chef Tom Yokel, will specialize in steaks, chops, chicken and prime beef as well as Tom's favorite dish, stuffed shrimp.

Bandstand features Hal DeCicco, pianist, for both dinner hour and the late trade.

The Tic-Tac-Toe trio is the club's new show group which also plays for dancing.

Here and there

Herbert Heilman in town for a day.

Hubie's restaurant activities up in Lorain, Ohio, may preclude his return here until after Oct. 20, date set for reopening the Heilman Restaurant on Sunman Restaurant on Sunrise.

Louise Franklin cornering the gift shop market in Lauderdale.

Vivacious redhead debuts another shop, her sixth, in the Governor's Club Hotel this week.

Sunday New Orleans brunches continue at the Trade Winds but the daily French buffets have been called off.

Mackey Airline's new Sunshine Inn at Bimini set to open some time this month, according to Hank Johnson.

Student Prince Lounge on Atlantic Blvd. plotting a month-long `` festival '' throughout October, with special features.

Don Drinkhouse of Pal's Restaurant planning a reunion with the Miami Playboy Club's pianist, Julian Gould.

Two were in the same band 18 years ago;;

Don, who played drums, hasn't seen his chum since.

Steak House has such a run on beer to wash down that Mexican food `` Tex '' Burgess had to call the draft man twice in one day.

( Which is understandable -- if you've ever sampled the exotic, peppery fare.

)

faces in places

Pualani and Randy Avon, Dave Searles, George( Papa) Gill, Al Bandish, Jim Morgart, Bob Neil at the Mouse Trap.

Billy and Jean Moffett at the Rickshaw.

Bea Morley, Jimmy Fazio, Jim O'Hare, Ralph Michaels, Bill and Evelyn Perry at the Escape.

Murphy honors

hear that Patricia Murphy flies up to St. John's Newfoundland, next Sunday to attend the government's special ceremonies at Memorial University honoring distinguished sons and daughters of the island province.

Miss Murphy was born in Placentia, Newfoundland.

Her invitation from Premier Joseph Smallwood is reported to be the only one extended to a woman.

Fort Lauderdale

-- The first in a series of five productions will be held in War Memorial Auditorium Thursday, Oct. 26.

`` Le Theatre D'Art Du Ballet '', of Monte Carlo, will present a program of four ballets including `` Francesca Da Rimini ''.

Performers include a company of 46 dancers and a symphony orchestra.

The series of ballets is sponsored by the Milenoff Ballet Foundation, Inc., a non-profit foundation with headquarters in Coral Gables.

Also set for appearances at the auditorium this season are: `` American Ballet Theatre '' on Jan. 27, `` Ximenez-Vargas Ballet Espagnol '' on Feb. 2;;

Jorge Bolet, pianist, on Feb. 23;;

and `` Dancers of Bali '' on March 8.

Hollywood

-- A Southeast Library Workshop will be held here Oct. 9, conducted by Mrs. Gretchen Schenk of Summerdale, Ala., author, lecturer and library leader.

The workshop will begin at 10 a.m. and end at 3 p.m. in the auditorium of the Library and Fine Arts Building.

There is no registration fee but there will be a charge of $2.50 for the luncheon to be held in the library and fine arts building.

Anyone interested in attending the meeting may have reservations with Mrs. John Whelan at the Hollywood Public Library.

At the workshop, Mrs. Schenk will discuss `` the board and the staff, librarian-board relationships, personnel policies, how good is our librarian and staff, how good am I as a library board member and how good is our library ''.

Other workshops will be in Tallahassee Oct. 5;;

Jacksonville, Oct. 6;;

Orlando, Oct. 10;;

Plant City Oct. 11.

Fort Lauderdale

-- A series of high school assemblies to acquaint junior and senior students with the Junior Achievement program begins at St. Thomas Aquinas Monday.

Subsequent assemblies will be held at Stranahan High School Tuesday, at Pompano Beach High Wednesday, and at Fort Lauderdale high Thursday.

The business education program operates with the cooperation of local high schools and business firms.

Is there anything a frustrated individual can do about Communism's growing threat on our doorstep and around the world??

More than 300 teenagers last Sunday proved there is and as many more are expected to prove it again for Jim Kern and his wife Lynn from 4 to 8 p.m. Sunday at First Presbyterian Church.

At that time the second half of the Christian Youth Crusade against Communism will be staged.

A young real estate salesman, Kern first got seriously interested in the problems posed by Communism when in the Navy Air Force.

He was particularly struck by a course on Communist brainwashing.

Kern began reading a lot about the history and philosophy of Communism, but never felt there was anything he, as an individual, could do about it.

When he attended the Christian Anti-Communist Crusade school here about six months ago, Jim became convinced that an individual can do something constructive in the ideological battle and set out to do it.

The best approach, he figured, was to try to influence young people like the high schoolers he and his wife serve as advisors at First Presbyterian Church.

And he wanted to be careful that the kids not only learn about Communist but also about what he feels is the only antidote -- a Biblically strong Christianity.

So the Christian Youth Crusade against Communisn developed and more than 300 top teenagers and 65 adult advisers from Presbyterian churches of the area sat enthralled at the four-hour program.

This Sunday those attending the second session will hear a lecture by Kern on the world situation;;

a review of the philosophy of Communist leaders by Ted Slack, another real estate agent who became interested as a philosophy major at the University of Miami;;

and talks on how their Christian faith can guide them in learning about and fighting Communism during high school and college days, by Ted Place, director of Greater Miami Youth for Christ, and Jon Braun, director of Campus Crusade for Christ.

The second half of the film `` Communism on the Map '' and the movie `` Operation Abolition '' also will be shown.

Response to the program has been so encouraging, Kern said, that a city-wide youth school at Dade County Auditorium may be set up soon.

And to encourage other churches to try their own programs, Kern said this Sunday's sessions -- including the free dinner -- will be open to anyone who makes reservations.

The need for and the way to achieve a Christian home will be stressed in special services marking National Christian Family Week in Miami area churches next week.

Of particular meaning to the Charles MacWhorter family, 3181 SW 24th Ter., will be the Family Dedication Service planned for 10:50 a.m. Sunday at First Christian Church.

It will be the second time the assistant manager of a Coral Gables restaurant and his wife have taken part in the twice-a-year ceremonies for families with new babies.

The first one, two years ago, changed the routine of their home life.

`` When you stand up in public and take vows to strive to set an example before your children and to teach them the fundamentals of the Christian faith, you strive a little harder to uphold those vows '', explains the slender vice president of the young couples Sunday school class.

Until that first dedication service, he and Lois felt their children were too young to take part in any religious life at home.

They have five daughters -- Coral Lee, 5, Glenda Rae, 4, Pamela, 3, Karen, 2, and Shari, five months.

But after that service, they decided to try to let the girls say grace at the table, have bedtime prayers, and Bible stories.

To their surprise, the children all were eager and quite able to take part.

Even the two-year-old feels miffed if the family has a prayer-time without her.

Dade's chief probation officer, Jack Blanton, will lead a discussion on `` The Changes in the American Family '' at 7:30 p.m. Sunday at Christ Lutheran Church.

Mr. and Mrs. George Treadwell will be honored at a Family Week supper and program at 6 p.m. Sunday at Trinity Methodist Church.

He is the sexton of the church.

A family worship service will follow the program at 7:45 p.m..

The outstanding family of Central Nazarene Church will be picked by ballot from among eight families during the 10:45 a.m. Sunday service marking National Family Week.

Every family of Riviera Presbyterian Church has been asked to read the Bible and pray together daily during National Christian Family Week and to undertake one project in which all members of the family participate.

To start the week of special programs at the church, the Rev. John D. Henderson will preach on `` A Successful Marriage '' at 9:40 and 11 a.m. Sunday.

New officers of the church will be ordained and installed at the 7:30 p.m. service.

A father and son dinner sponsored by the Men's Club will be held at 6:15 p.m. Monday and the annual church picnic at 4 p.m. next Saturday.

The week will end with the Rev. Mr. Henderson preaching on `` The Marriage Altar '' at 7:30 p.m. Sunday, May 14.

The resignation of the Rev. Warren I. Densmore, headmaster of St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School in Coconut Grove, becomes effective July 15.

Enrique Jorda, conductor and musical director of the San Francisco Symphony, will fulfill two more guest conducting engagements in Europe before returning home to open the symphony's Golden Anniversary season, it was announced.

The guest assignments are scheduled for November 14 and 18, with the Orchestra Sinfonica Siciliana in Palermo and the Orchestra of Radio Cologne.

The season in San Francisco will open with a special Gala Concert on November 22.

During his five-month visit abroad, Jorda recently conducted the Orchestre Philharmonique De Bordeau in France, and the Santa Cecilia Orchestra in Rome.

In announcing Jorda's return, the orchestra also announced that the sale of single tickets for the 50th anniversary season will start at the Sherman Clay box office on Wednesday.

Guest performers and conductors during the coming season will include many renowned artists who began their careers playing with the orchestra, including violinists Yehudi Menuhin, Isaac Stern, Ruggiero Ricci and David Abel;;

pianists Leon Fleisher, Ruth Slenczynka and Stephen Bishop and conductor Earl Bernard Murray.

The Leningrad Kirov Ballet, which opened a series of performances Friday night at the Opera House, is, I think, the finest `` classical '' ballet company I have ever seen, and the production of the Petipa-Tschaikowsky `` Sleeping Beauty '' with which it began the series is incomparably the finest I have ever had the pleasure of witnessing.

This work is no favorite of mine.

I am prepared to demonstrate at anytime that it represents the spirit of Imperial Russia in its most vulgar, infantile, and reactionary aspect;;

that its persistent use by ballet companies of the Soviet regime indicates that that old spirit is just as stultifying alive today as it ever was;;

that its presentation in this country is part of a capitalist plot to boobify the American people;;

that its choreography is undistinguished and its score a shapeless assemblage of self-plagiarisms.

All of this is true and all of it is totally meaningless in the face of the Kirov's utterly captivating presentation.

Precise

The reasons for this enchantment are numerous, but most of them end in `` ova '', `` eva '', or `` aya ''.

In other words, no merely male creature can resist that corps de ballet.

It seems to have been chosen exclusively from the winners of beauty contests -- Miss Omsk, Miss Pinsk, Miss Stalingr oops, skip it.

These qualities alone, however, would not account for their success, and it took me a while to discover the crowning virtue that completes this company's collective personality.

It is a kind of friendliness and frankness of address toward the audience which we have been led to believe was peculiar to the American ballet.

Oh-the-pain-of-it, that convention of Russian ballet whereby the girls convey the idea that they are all the daughters of impoverished Grand Dukes driven to the stage out of filial piety, is totally absent from the Kirov.

This is all the more remarkable because the Kirov is to ballet what Senator Goldwater is to American politics.

But, obviously, at least some things have changed for the better in Russia so far as the ballet is concerned.

Irina Kolpakova, the Princess Aurora of Friday's performance, would be a change for the better anywhere, at any time, no matter who had had the role before.

She is the most beautiful thing you ever laid eyes on, and her dancing has a feminine suavity, lightness, sparkle, and refinement which are simply incomparable.

Hit

Alla Sizova, who seems to have made a special hit in the East, was delightful as the lady Bluebird and her partner, Yuri Soloviev, was wonderfully virile, acrobatic, and poetic all at the same time, in a tradition not unlike that of Nijinsky.

Vladilen Semenov, a fine `` danseur noble '';;

Konstantin Shatilov, a great character dancer;;

and Inna Zubkovskaya, an excellent Lilac Fairy, were other outstanding members of the cast, but every member of the cast was magnificent.

The production, designed by Simon Virsaladze, was completely traditional but traditional in the right way.

It was done with great taste, was big and spacious, sumptuous as the dreams of any peasant in its courtly costumes, but sumptuous in a muted, pastel-like style, with rich, quiet harmonies of color between the costumes themselves and between the costumes and the scenery.

Evegeni Dubovskoi conducted an exceptionally large orchestra, one containing excellent soloists -- the violin solos by the concertmaster, Guy Lumia, were especially fine -- but one in which the core of traveling players and the body of men added locally had not had time to achieve much unity.

Mail orders are now being received for the series of concerts to be given this season under the auspices of the San Francisco Chamber Music Society.

The season will open at the new Hall of Flowers in Golden Gate Park on November 20 at 8:30 p.m. with a concert by the Mills Chamber Players.

Sustaining members may sign up at $25 for the ten-concert season;;

annual members may attend for $16.

Participating members may attend five of the concerts for $9( not all ten concerts as was erroneously announced earlier in The Chronicle).

Mail orders for the season and orders for single tickets at $2, may be addressed to the society, 1044 Chestnut Street, San Francisco 9.

San Francisco firemen busied themselves last week with their annual voluntary task of fixing up toys for distribution to needy children.

Fire Fighters Local 798, which is sponsoring the toy program for the 12th straight year, issued a call for San Franciscans to turn in discarded toys, which will be repaired by off-duty firemen.

Toys will not be collected at firehouses this year.

They will be accepted at all branches of the Bay View Federal Savings and Loan Association, at a collection center in the center of the Stonestown mall, and at the Junior Museum, 16th Street and Roosevelt Way.

From the collection centers, toys will be taken to a warehouse at 198 Second street, where they will be repaired and made ready for distribution.

Any needy family living in San Francisco can obtain toys by writing to Christmas Toys, 676 Howard street, San Francisco 5, and listing the parent's name and address and the age and sex of each child in the family between the ages of 1 and 12.

Requests must be mailed in by December 5.

Famed cellist Pablo Casals took his instrument to the East Room of the White House yesterday and charmed the staff with a two-hour rehearsal.

He was getting the feel of the room for a concert tomorrow night for Puerto Rico Governor Luis Munoz Marin.

President Kennedy's invitation to the Spanish-born master said, `` We feel your performance as one of the world's greatest artists would lend distinction to the entertainment of our guests ''.

For A good many seasons I've been looking at the naughty stuff on television, so the other night I thought I ought to see how immorality is doing on the other side of the fence in movies.

After all, this year's movies are next year's television shows.

So I went to see `` La Dolce Vita ''.

It has been billed as a towering monument to immorality.

All the sins of ancient Rome are said to be collected into this three-hour film.

If that's all the Romans did, it's a surprise to me that Rome fell.

After television, `` La Dolce Vita '' seems as harmless as a Gray Line tour of North Beach at night.

I cannot imagine a single scene that isn't done in a far naughtier manner on TV every week.

I believe TV watchers will be bored.

`` La Dolce Vita '' has none of the senseless brutality or sadism of the average TV Western.

Week in, week out, there is more sex to be seen in `` The Adventures Of Ozzie And Harriet ''.

There is more decadence on `` 77 Sunset Strip ''.

There are more obvious nymphomaniacs on any private-eye series.

In another respect, television viewers will feel right at home because most of the actors are unknowns.

With the exception of Lex Barker and Anita Ekberg, the credits are as unfamiliar as you'll find on the Robert Herridge Theater.

Most of the emphasis has been placed on a `` wild party '' at a seaside villa.

Producer Fellini should have looked at some of the old silent films where they really had parties!!

The Dolce Vita get-together boasted a strip tease( carried as far as a black slip);;

a lady drunk on her hands and knees who carries the hero around on her back while he throws pillow feathers in her face;;

a frigid beauty, and three silly fairies.

Put them all together and they spell out the only four-letter word I can think of: dull.

Apparently Fellini caught the crowd when its parties had begun to pall.

What a swinging group they must have been when they first started entertaining!!

As A moral shocker it is a dud.

But this doesn't detract from its merit as an interesting, if not great, film.

The Chronicle's Paine Knickerbocker summed it up neatly:

`` This is a long picture and a controversial one, but basically it is a moral, enthralling and heartbreaking description of humans who have become unlinked from life as perhaps Rome has from her traditional political, cultural and religious glories ''.

And when they sell it to television in a couple of years, it can be shown without editing.

Tonight Atlantic Monthly editor Edward Weeks moderates a round table of four Russian writers in a discussion of Soviet literature.

Among the subjects discussed will be Russian restrictions on poets and writers in the USSR( Channel 9 at 9:30).

Person To Person ventilates the home lives of Johnny Mercer and Joan Collins -- both in Southern California( Channel 5 at 10:30) KQED Summer Music Festival features a live concert by the Capello De Musica( Channel 9 at 8:30).

NBC plans a new series of three long programs exploring America's scientific plans titled `` Threshold '', to start in the fall.

`` Science In Action '', San Francisco's venerable television program, will be seen in Hong Kong this fall in four languages: Mandarin, Cantonese, Chiuchow and English, according to a tip from Dr. Robert C. Miller.

And you think you have language problems.

The week went along briskly enough.

I bought a new little foreign bomb.

It is a British bomb.

Very austere yet racy.

It is very chic to drive foreign cars.

With a foreign car you must wear a cap -- it has a leather band in the back.

You must also wear a car coat.

The wardrobe for a foreign bomb is a little expensive.

But we couldn't really get along without it.

`` Where do you put the lighter fluid, ha, ha ''??

Asked the gas station man.

The present crop of small cars is enriching American humor.

Gas station people are very debonair about small cars.

When I drove a car with tail fins, I had plenty status at the wind-and-water oases.

My car gulped 20 gallons without even wiping its mouth.

This excellent foreign bomb takes only six.

When I had my big job with the double headlights and yards of chrome, the gas people were happy to see me.

`` Tires OK??

Check the oil and water, sir??

''

They polished the windshield.

They had a loving touch.

The man stuck the nozzle in the gas tank.

`` What kind of car is it ''??

He asked gloomily.

`` It is a British Austin, the smallest they make ''.

`` Get much mileage ''??

`` About 35 ''.

The gas station man sighed unhappily.

`` What I always say is what if somebody clobbers you in a little car like that??

Crunch, that's all she wrote ''.

`` I will die rich ''.

`` That will be $1.80 '', said the gas station man.

`` The windshield looks pretty clean ''.

Ah, the fair-weather friends of yesteryear!!

When I wheeled about, finned fore and aft, I was the darling of the doormen.

Dollar bills skidded off my hands and they tipped their caps politely.

With a small bomb, I tuck it between Cadillacs.

( The last doorman that saw me do that should calm himself.

High blood pressure can get the best of any of us.

)

At last the White House is going to get some much-copied furniture by that master American craftsman, Duncan Phyfe, whose designs were snubbed in his lifetime when the U. S. Presidents of the 19th Century sent abroad for their furnishings.

The American Institute of Decorators has acquired a rare complete set of sofas and chairs which are to be placed in the Executive Mansion's library.

The suite has been in the same family since the early 1800's.

The gift is being presented by `` heirs and descendants of the Rutherford family of New Jersey, whose famous estate, `` Tranquility '', was located near the Duncan Phyfe workshop at Andover, N. J..

Authenticated pieces of Duncan Phyfe furniture are uncommon, although millions of American homes today display pieces patterned after the style trends he set 150 years ago.

This acquisition is a matched, perfect set -- consisting of two sofas six feet long, plus six sidechairs and two armchairs.

The AID has undertaken the redecoration of the White House library as a project in connection with the work being done by First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy's Fine Arts Advisory Committee to secure antiques for the presidential home.

It is the AID's intention to create in the library `` a miniature museum of Americana '' before completed refurbishing is unveiled early this fall.

The room will also feature another rarity many antiquarians would consider more important than the Duncan Phyfe furniture.

The AID has found a mantlepiece attributed to Samuel McIntyre of Salem, Mass., an architect and woodcarver who competed for the designing of the Capitol here in 1792.

The mantel was found in a recently demolished Salem house and is being fitted over the White House library fireplace.

It will be painted to match the paneling in the room.

The AID committee's chairman in charge of the redecoration, Mrs. Henry Francis Lenygon, was in town yesterday to consult with White House staff members on the project.

Mrs. Lenygon's committee associates, announced formally yesterday by the AID in New York, include Mrs. Allen Lehman McCluskey and Stephen J. Jussel, both wellknown Manhattan decorators.

Regional representatives appointed to serve from each section of the country include Frank E. Barnes of Boston.

President Kennedy couldn't stay away from his desk for the 75-minute young people's concert played on the White House lawn yesterday by the 85-piece Transylvania Symphony Orchestra from Brevard, N. C..

But he left the doors to his office open so he could hear the music.

At 4 p.m. the President left the White House to welcome the young musicians, students from the ages of 12 to 18 who spend six weeks at the Brevard Music Center summer camp, and to greet the 325 crippled, cardiac and blind children from the District area who were special guests at the concert.

It was the first in the series of `` Concerts for Young People by Young People '' to be sponsored by First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy at the White House.

She was not present yesterday, however, to enjoy the music or watch the faces of the delighted audience.

She is vacationing at the Kennedy summer home in Hyannis Port, Mass., and in his welcoming remarks, the President said he was representing her.

As he approached the open bandstand, erected facing the South entrance to the Executive Mansion, the band struck up the `` Star Spangled Banner '' and followed it with `` Hail To The Chief ''.

`` I think they played Hail To The Chief better than the Marine Corps Band, and we are grateful to them '', President Kennedy remarked after mounting the bandstand and shaking hands with conductor James Christian Pfohl.

After paying tribute to the conductor and his white-clad youthful students, President Kennedy said, `` As an American I have the greatest possible pride in the work that is being done in dozens of schools stretching across the United States -- schools where devoted teachers are studying with interested young men and women and opening up the whole wide horizon of serious music ''.

He added `` I think that sometimes in this country we are not aware as we should be of the extraordinary work that is being done in this field ''.

Displaying his knowledge of music, the New England-born President remarked that `` probably the best chamber music in the world is played in Vermont, by young Americans -- and here in this school where they have produced extraordinary musicians and teachers, and their work is being duplicated all across the United States.

`` This is a great national cultural asset, and therefore it is a great source of satisfaction to me, representing as I do today my wife, to welcome all of you here today at the White House ''.

As he left the bandstand to return to his office, the slender, sun-tanned Chief Executive paused along the way to shake hands with the members of the audience in wheel chairs forming the first row under the field tent set up for the guests.

He expressed surprise to learn that pretty, blonde Patricia Holbrook, 16, of Mount Rainier, had attended the Joseph P. Kennedy School for the Handicapped in Boston.

`` The nuns there do a wonderful work '', the President commented.

Patricia now attends the C. Melvin Sharpe Health School in the District.

Each of the children invited to the concert wore a name tag marked with a red, white and blue ribbon.

They enjoyed lemonade and cookies served before and during the concert by teenage sons and daughters of members of the White House staff.

Many of the music-loving members of the President's staff gathered around the tent listening and watching the rapt attention given by the young seated audience.

And it turned out to be more of a family affair than expected.

Henry Hall Wilson, a student at the music camp 25 years ago and now on the President's staff as liaison representative with the House of Representatives, turned guest conductor for a Sousa march, the `` Stars and Stripes Forever ''.

Transylvania Symphony Conductor Pfohl said yesterday that Mrs. Kennedy's Social Secretary, Letitia Baldrige, told about plans for White House youth concerts before the National Symphony Orchestra League in Philadelphia last spring.

He said he contacted a friend, Henry Hall Wilson, on the President's staff and asked whether his orchestra could play, in the series.

A flow of correspondence between Pfohl and Miss Baldrige resulted in an invitation to the 85-student North Carolina group to play the first concert.

One of the most interested `` students '' on the tour which the Brevard group took at the National Gallery yesterday following their concert at the White House, was Letitia Baldrige, social secretary to First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy.

`` I was an art major in college '', Miss Baldrige explained.

`` I've been here so many times I couldn't count them ''.

She turned out to be a fan, too, of Margaret Bouton, the Gallery's associate curator of education.

Miss Bouton headed up one of the four groups that went on simultaneous tours after the Gallery had closed at 5 p.m..

The Brevard group of 85 arrived at the Gallery at 6 p.m., remaining for about 45 minutes.

The Brevard visitors had very little to say at the beginning of the tour but warmed up later.

They decided that they thought Rembrandt's self-portrait made him look `` sad '';;

they noticed Roman buildings in the background of Raphael's `` Alba Madonna '' and `` texture '' in a Monet painting of Rheims Cathedral.

Everybody had heard of Van Gogh, the French impressionist.

Gallery Director John Walker greeted the group, standing on one of the benches in the downstairs lobby to speak to them.

He pointed out to the young musicians that the National Gallery `` is the only museum in the country to have a full-time music director, Richard Bales.

I'm sure you've heard of him and his record,' The Confederacy' ''.

Along with the gallery aide who explained the various paintings and sculptures to each group, went one of the Gallery's blue-uniformed guards.

In 45 minutes, the Gallery leaders had given the students a quick rundown on art from the Renaissance to the late 19th Century.

A few of them said they `` preferred contemporary art ''.

Among the other artists, whose paintings were discussed were Boucher, Courbet, Fra Angelico.

The thing that impressed one of the visitors the most was the Gallery's rotunda fountain `` because it's on the second floor ''.

That imposing, somewhat austere, and seemingly remote collonaded building with the sphynxes perched on its threshold at 1733 16th St. nw. took on bustling life yesterday.

More than 250 Scottish Rite Masons and guests gathered in their House of the Temple to pay tribute to their most prominent leader, Albert Pike, who headed the Scottish Rite from 1859 to 1891.

They came together in the huge, high-ceilinged Council Chamber to hear the late leader eulogized.

C. Wheeler Barnes of Denver, head of the Scottish Rite in Colorado, praised Pike as a historian, author, poet, journalist, lawyer, jurist, soldier and musician, who devoted most of his mature years to the strengthening of the Masonic Order.

The ceremony ended with the laying of a wreath at the crypt of Pike in the House of the Temple.

A reception and tea followed.

About 1500 delegates are expected to register today for the biennial session of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States.

The opening session of the 5-day session will begin at 10 a.m. today.

There will be a pilgrimage to Mount Vernon at 2:30 p.m..

A wreath will be placed at the tomb of George Washington, one of this Nation's first Masons -- a past master of Washington-Alexandria Lodge 22 in Alexandria.

The marriage of John and Mary Black had clearly reached the breaking point after eight years.

John had a job in a small firm where the work was dull and monotonous.

He would come home in the evening tired and discouraged -- in no frame of mind to play with their three children, or spend much time chatting with his wife.

Hurt by his lack of interest and attention, Mary complained often that he didn't help around the house, and that he didn't really care about the family.

She accused him of ignoring her.

He in turn told her she demanded too much.

They were both discouraged, disgusted and miserable.

Mary decided she had had enough.

Without any definite plan in mind, she went to a judge to see what could be done.

The judge listened quietly as the young woman poured out her frustrations -- then discussing with her the possibility of seeking aid from Family Service before going to a lawyer.

Family Service, sharing in UGF, has five agencies in the Washington area.

They offer to the people of this community case work service and counseling on a wide variety of family problems.

Because neither of them really wanted their marriage to break up, Mr. and Mrs. Black agreed to a series of interviews at Family Service of Northern Virginia, the agency nearest them.

For nearly a year, they have been receiving counseling, separately and together, in an effort to understand and overcome the antagonisms which had given rise to the possibility of divorce.

The interviews have led each of them to a new appreciation of the problems confronting the other.

They are now working together toward solving their difficulties.

John received a promotion in his firm.

He gives credit for the promotion to his new outlook on life.

Mary is cheery and gay when her husband comes home in the evenings, and the children's bed-time is frequently preceeded by a session of happy, family rough-housing.

To outsiders, the Blacks seem to be an ordinary, happy family, and they are -- but with a difference.

They know the value of being just that -- an ordinary, happy family.

Family Service has helped hundreds of families in this area.

Perhaps to some their work does not seem particularly vital.

But to the families it serves, their help cannot be measured.

Family Service could not open its doors to a single family without the financial support of the United Givers Fund.

Anticipated heavy traffic along the Skyline Drive failed to materialize yesterday, park rangers said, and those who made the trip got a leisurely view of the fall colors through skies swept clear of haze.

For crucial encounter

One of the initial questions put to President Kennedy at his first news conference last January was about his attitude toward a meeting with Premier Khrushchev.

Mr. Kennedy replied:

`` I'm hopeful that from more traditional exchanges we can perhaps find greater common ground ''.

The President knew that a confrontation with Mr. Khrushchev sooner or later probably was inevitable and even desirable.

But he was convinced that the realities of power -- military, economic and ideological -- were the decisive factors in the struggle with the Communists and that these could not be talked away at a heads of government meeting.

He wanted to buy time to strengthen the U. S. and its allies and to define and begin to implement his foreign policy.

Last Friday the White House announced:

President Kennedy will meet with Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev in Vienna June 3 and 4.

The announcement came after a period of sharp deterioration in East-West relations.

The heightened tension, in fact, had been a major factor in the President's change of view about the urgency of a meeting with the Soviet leader.

He was not going to Vienna to negotiate -- the simultaneous announcements in Washington and Moscow last week stressed that no formal negotiations were planned.

But Mr. Kennedy had become convinced that a personal confrontation with Mr. Khrushchev might be the only way to prevent catastrophe.

That objective set the high stakes and drama of the Vienna meeting.

Despite efforts by Washington last week to play down the significance of the meeting, it clearly was going to be one of the crucial encounters of the cold war.

Road to Vienna

The U. S. and Soviet heads of Government have met three times since Sir Winston Churchill in 1953 introduced a new word into international diplomacy with his call for a fresh approach to the problem of peace `` at the summit of the nations ''.

The first time was in 1955 when a full-dress Big Four summit meeting produced the `` spirit of Geneva ''.

The spirit served chiefly to lull the West while Moscow made inroads into the Middle East.

In 1959 President Eisenhower and Premier Khrushchev held an informal session in the U. S..

That meeting produced the `` spirit of Camp David '' -- a spirit, it later turned out, that masked a basic misunderstanding about progress toward a Berlin settlement.

On the third occasion -- another Big Four summit session at Paris a year ago -- there was no problem of an illusory `` spirit ''.

Premier Khrushchev wrecked the conference at its initial session with a bitter denunciation of the U. S. for the U-2 incident.

The episode tended to confirm the U. S. belief that propaganda, the hope of one-sided concessions, and the chance to split the Allies, rather than genuine negotiation, were the Soviet leader's real aims in summitry.

Pre-inaugural position

Thus when Premier Khrushchev intimated even before inauguration that he hoped for an early meeting with the new President, Mr. Kennedy was confronted with a delicate problem.

Shortly before his nomination he had set forth his basic view about the problem of negotiations with the Soviet leader in these words:

`` As long as Mr. Khrushchev is convinced that the balance of world power is shifting his way, no amount of either smiles or toughness, neither Camp David talks nor kitchen debates, can compel him to enter fruitful negotiations ''.

The President had set for himself the task, which he believed vital, of awakening the U. S. and its allies to the hard and complex effort necessary to shift that balance.

He did not want the effort weakened by any illusion that summit magic might make it unnecessary.

He wanted time, too, to review the United States' global commitments and to test both the policies he had inherited and new ones he was formulating.

Above all, he did not want to appear to be running hat in hand to Premier Khrushchev's doorstep.

Attitude flexible

At the same time the President took pains not to rule out an eventual meeting with the Soviet leader.

Ideally, he knew, it should be preceded by concrete progress at lower levels.

But Mr. Kennedy saw value even in an informal meeting, provided that undue hopes were not raised in connection with it.

It would give him an opportunity to take the measure of his chief adversary in the cold war, to try to probe Mr. Khrushchev's intentions and to make clear his own views.

Moreover, an eventual meeting was desirable if for no other reason than to satisfy world opinion that the U. S. was not inflexible and was sparing no effort to ease international tensions.

Both elements -- the caution about a meeting, the willingness eventually to hold one -- were reflected in a letter from the President which Ambassador Llewellyn E. Thompson brought back to Russia late in February.

The letter, dated Feb. 22, was delivered to Premier Khrushchev in Novosibirsk, Siberia, on March 9.

It dealt mainly with a broad range of East-West issues.

But it also briefly suggested the possibility of a meeting with Mr. Khrushchev before the end of the year if the international climate were favorable and schedules permitted.

Developments over the next two months, however, caused the President to reconsider the question of the timing.

There were intense discussions in the inner councils of the White House about the advisability of an early meeting, not because the international climate was improving, but precisely because it was deteriorating alarmingly.

Deadlock on tests

The President was especially concerned about the deadlock in the nuclear test ban negotiations at Geneva.

The deadlock has been caused by the Russians' new demand for a three-man( East, West and neutral) directorate, and thus a veto, over the control machinery.

In the U. S., strong pressures have been building up for a resumption of tests on grounds that the Russians may be secretly testing.

Mr. Kennedy was less troubled by that possibility than by the belief that a Geneva breakdown, or even continued stalemate, would mean an unchecked spread of nuclear weapons to other countries as well as a fatal blow to any hope for disarmament.

There was reason to believe that Premier Khrushchev was also concerned about a possible spread of nuclear weapons, particularly to Communist China.

The question arose as to whether a frank discussion of that danger with the Soviet leader had not become urgent.

Moreover, Moscow appeared determined to apply the tripartite veto principle to the executive organs of all international bodies, including the U. N. Secretariat and the International Control Commission for Laos.

Mr. Kennedy was convinced that insistence on the demand would make international agreements, or even negotiations, impossible.

Developments in Cuba and Laos also suggested the advisability of an early summit meeting.

Initially the White House reaction was that the bitter exchanges with Moscow over Cuba and the conflict in Laos had dampened prospects for a meeting.

At the same time, there was increased reason for a quick meeting lest the Soviet leader, as a result of those episodes, come to a dangerously erroneous conclusion about the West's ability and determination to resist Communist pressure.

In Cuba, the U. S. had blundered badly and created the impression of impotency against Communist penetration even on its own doorstep.

In Laos, the picture was almost equally bad.

U. S. willingness to accept a neutral Laos may have led Premier Khrushchev to believe that other areas could be `` neutralized '' on Soviet terms.

Beyond that, Allied disagreement about military intervention in Laos -- despite warnings that they might do so -- allowed Moscow to carry out with impunity a series of military and diplomatic moves that greatly strengthened the pro-Communist forces.

As a result, the West is in a poor bargaining position at the current Geneva negotiations on Laos, and South Vietnam and other nations in Southeast Asia are under increased pressure.

In the light of those events, there appeared to be a real danger that Premier Khrushchev might overreach himself.

Ambassador Thompson reported from Moscow that the Soviet leader's mood was cocky and aggressive.

He has indicated that he plans new moves on Berlin before the year is out.

The President and his advisers felt that the time might have come to warn Premier Khrushchev against a grave miscalculation in areas such as Berlin, Iran or Latin America from which there would be no turning back.

It was in the midst of such White House deliberations that Premier Khrushchev on May 4 made new inquiries through the U. S. Embassy in Moscow about a meeting with the President in the near future.

Mr. Kennedy told Moscow he would give his answer by May 20 after consultation with the Allies.

The response from London, Paris and Bonn was favorable.

Firm arrangements for the meeting in Vienna were worked out in a final exchange between Moscow and Washington last week.

Apparently at the insistence of the U. S., the simultaneous announcements issued in Washington and Moscow last Friday emphasized the `` informal '' nature of the meeting.

The Washington announcement said:

`` The President and Chairman Khrushchev understand that this meeting is not for the purpose of negotiating or reaching agreement on the major international problems that involve the interest of many other countries.

The meeting will, however, afford a timely and convenient opportunity for the first personal contact between them and a general exchange of views on the major issues which affect the relationships between the two countries ''.

The outlook

The Vienna meeting will bring together a seasoned, 67-year-old veteran of the cold war who, in Mr. Kennedy's own words, is `` shrewd, tough, vigorous, well-informed and confident '', and a 44-year-old President( his birthday is May 29) with a demonstrated capacity for political battle but little experience in international diplomacy.

The announcement last week of the forthcoming encounter produced strong reactions in the U. S. of both approval and disapproval.

The approval did not arise from an expectation of far-reaching agreements at Vienna.

The inclination was to accept the statement that there would be no formal negotiations.

But those who were in favor of the meeting felt that a frank exchange between the two men and an opportunity to size one another up would prove salutary.

Mr. Khrushchev is known to rely heavily on his instincts about his adversaries and to be a shrewd judge of men.

The feeling was that he would sense an inner core of toughness and determination in the President and that plain talk by Mr. Kennedy would give him pause.

Apart from the personal equation, another reason advanced in favor of the meeting was that too often in the past the U.S. appeared to have been dragged reluctantly to the summit.

Premier Khrushchev has made propaganda capital out of that fact and in the end got his summit meeting anyway.

This time the initiative came, in part at least, from Washington.

Other allies consulted

There was also the fact that by the time he meets Mr. Khrushchev, the President will have completed conversations with all the other principal Allied leaders.

Thus he will be in a position to disabuse the Soviet leader of any notions he may have about grave Allied disunity.

Finally, there was a wide area of agreement on the value of the President's making a final effort in the summit spotlight for a nuclear test accord.

There is no single issue that has aroused stronger feelings throughout the world.

If tests are to be resumed, the argument went, it is vital that the U. S. make plain that the onus belongs to the Soviet Union.

Disapproval of the meeting was based largely on the belief that the timing could hardly be worse.

After Cuba and Laos, it was argued, Mr. Khrushchev will interpret the President's consent to the meeting as further evidence of Western weakness -- perhaps even panic -- and is certain to try to exploit the advantage he now believes he holds.

Moreover, the President is meeting the Soviet leader at a time when the Administration has still not decided on the scope of America's firm foreign policy commitments.

The question was raised, for example, as to what attitude the President would take if Mr. Khrushchev proposes a broad neutral belt extending from Southeast Asia to the Middle East.

There are, so my biologist friends tell me, mechanisms of adaptation and defense that are just too complete and too satisfactory.

Mollusks are a case in point.

The shell, which served the strain so well at a relatively early stage in the evolutionary scheme, tended to cancel out the possibility of future development.

Though this may or may not be good biology, it does aptly illustrate the strength and the weakness of American Catholic higher education.

There can be no doubt that the American Catholic accomplishment in the field of higher education is most impressive: our European brethren never cease to marvel at the number and the size of our colleges and universities.

The deeper wonder is how this miracle was accomplished in decades, rather than in centuries and by immigrant minorities at that.

By way of explanation we ourselves are prone to imagine that this achievement stems from the same American Catholic zeal and generosity which brought the parochial school system into existence.

There is, however, one curious discrepancy in this broad and flattering picture.

Viewing the American Catholic educational achievement in retrospect, we may indeed see it as a unified whole extending from grade school to university.

But the simple truth is that higher education has never really been an official American Catholic project;;

certainly not in the same sense that the establishment of a parochial school system has been a matter of official policy.

Official encouragement is one thing, but the down-to-earth test is the allocation of diocesan and parochial funds.

American Catholics have responded generously to bishops' and pastors' appeals for the support necessary to create parochial schools but they have not contributed in a similar fashion to the establishment of institutions of higher learning.

They have not done so for the simple reason that such appeals have hardly ever been made.

Diocesan authorities generally have not regarded this as their direct responsibility.

All of this may be understandable enough: it is, however, in fact difficult to see how diocesan authorities could have acted otherwise.

Yet for better or for worse, the truth of the matter is that most American Catholic colleges do not owe their existence to general Catholic support but rather to the initiative, resourcefulness and sacrifices of individual religious communities.

Community esprit de corps has been the protective shell which has made the achievement possible.

To understand the past history -- and the future potential -- of American Catholic higher education, it is necessary to appreciate the special character of the esprit de corps of the religious community.

It is something more than the arithmetical sum of individual totals of piety and detachment.

A religious community with a vital sense of mission achieves a degree of group orientation and group identification seldom found elsewhere.

The fact that the group orientation and group identification are founded on supernatural principles and nourished by the well-springs of devotion simply give them a deeper and more satisfying dimension.

The net result is a uniquely satisfying sense of comradeship, the kind of comradeship which sparks enthusiasm and blunts the cutting edge of sacrifice and hardship.

American Catholic colleges and universities are, in a very real sense, the product of `` private enterprise '' -- the `` private enterprise '' of religious communities.

Had it not been for such private enterprise, diocesan authorities might of course have been goaded into establishing institutions subsidized by diocesan funds and parish collections and staffed by religious as paid employees.

There is however no point in speculating about such a possibility: the fact of the matter is that our institutions of higher learning owe their existence to a spirit not unlike that which produces the `` family business ''.

This `` family-community '' spirit is the real explanation of the marvel of our achievement.

It is this spirit which explains some of the anomalies of American Catholic higher education, in particular the wasteful duplication apparent in some areas.

I think for example of three women's colleges with pitifully small enrollments, clustered within a few miles of a major Catholic university, which is also co-educational.

This is not an isolated example;;

this aspect of the total picture has been commented upon often enough.

It would seem to represent esprit de corps run riot.

Apart, however, from the question of wasteful duplication, there is another aspect of the `` family business '' spirit in American Catholic higher education which deserves closer scrutiny.

For while the past needs of the Church in this country may have been adequately met by collegiate institutions, which in temper and tone closely resembled junior colleges and finishing schools, it would seem that today's need is for the college which more closely resembles the university in its `` pursuit of excellence ''.

At the earlier `` pre-academic excellence '' stage of Catholic education, the operation could be conducted on an intra-mural community basis.

But with today's demand for professional qualifications and specialized training, the need for `` outsiders '' becomes more pressing.

The problem is not merely that more `` outside teachers '' are needed but that a different brand is called for.

Commenting on the earlier stage, the Notre Dame Chapter of the American Association of University Professors( in a recent report on the question of faculty participation in administrative decision-making) noted that the term `` teacher-employee ''( as opposed to, e.g., `` maintenance employee '') was a not inapt description.

Today however, the `` outsider '' is likely to have professional qualifications of the highest order( otherwise the college would not be interested in hiring him) and to be acclimatized to the democratic processes of the secular or state university.

And while no one expects total democracy on the academic scene, the scholar will be particularly sensitive to a line between first and second class citizenship drawn on any basis other than that of academic rank or professional achievement.

In the above mentioned report of the Notre Dame Chapter of the American Association of University Professors, the basic outlook of the new breed of lay faculty emerges very clearly in the very statement of the problem as the members see it: `` Even with the best of intentions he( the President of the university) is loath to delegate such authority and responsibility to a group the membership of which, considered( as it must be by him) in individual terms, is inhomogeneous, mortal and of extremely varying temperament, interests and capabilities.

It is natural that he should turn for his major support to a select and dedicated few from the organization which actually owns the university and whose goals are, in their opinion, identified with its highest good and( to use that oft-repeated phrase)' the attainment of excellence' ''.

The pattern here pictured is clearly not peculiar to Notre Dame: it is simply that the paradox involved in this kind of control of the institution by `` the organization which actually owns '' it, becomes more obvious where there is a larger and more distinguished `` outside '' faculty.

It is particularly interesting that those who framed the report should refer to `` the organization which actually owns the university '': this seems to show an awareness of the fact that there is more to the problem than the ordinary issue of clerical-lay tension.

But in any case, one does not have to read very closely between the lines to realize that the situation is not regarded as a particularly happy one.

`` Outside '' faculty members want to be considered partners in the academic enterprise and not merely paid employees of a family business.

There are two reasons why failure to come to grips with this demand could be fatal to the future of the Catholic university.

In the first place there is the obvious problem of recruiting high caliber personnel.

Word spreads rapidly in the tightly knit academic profession, much given to attending meetings and conferences.

Expressions of even low-key dissatisfaction by a Catholic college faculty member has the effect of confirming the already existing stereotype.

In the academic world there is seldom anything so dramatic as a strike or a boycott: all that happens is that the better qualified teacher declines to gamble two or three years of his life on the chance that conditions at the Catholic institution will be as good as those elsewhere.

To appreciate the nature of the gamble, it should be realized that while college teaching is almost a public symbol of security, that security does not come as quickly or as automatically as it does in an elementary school system or in the Civil Service.

Much has been made of the fact that major Catholic institutions now guarantee firm tenure.

This is a significant advance but its import should not be exaggerated.

When a man invests a block of his years at a university without gaining the coveted promotion, not only is he faced with the problem of starting over but there is also a certain depreciation in the market value of his services.

A man does not make that kind of gamble if he suspects that one or more of the limited number of tenure positions is being reserved for members of the `` family ''.

Just as it is possible to exaggerate the drawing power of the new tenure practices, it is also possible to exaggerate the significance of the now relatively adequate salaries paid by major Catholic institutions.

Adequate compensation is indispensable.

Yet adequate compensation -- and particularly merely adequate compensation is no substitute for those intangibles which cause a man to sacrifice part of his earning potential by taking up college teaching in the first place.

Broadly speaking the total Catholic atmosphere is such an intangible but the larger demand is for a sense of creative participation and mature responsibility in the total work of the university.

Religious who derive their own sense of purpose through identification with the religious community rather than the academic community are prone to underestimate both the layman's reservoir of idealism and his need for this identification.

There is no need here to spell out the conditions of creative teaching except to point out that, at the college level, the sense of community and of community responsibility is even more necessary than it is at other levels.

The college teacher needs the stimulus of communication with other faculty members but he also needs to feel that such communication, even informal debates over the luncheon table, are a contribution to the total good of the institution.

But this in turn means that decisions are not merely imposed from the top but that there be some actual mechanism of faculty participation.

The second reason for being concerned with the dichotomy between faculty members who are part of the `` in-group '' that owns and operates the institution and those who are merely paid employees, is, therefore, the baneful effect on the caliber of the teaching itself.

This is a problem that goes considerably beyond questions of salary and tenure.

Yet though it may seem difficult to envision any definitive resolution of the problem of ownership and control, there are nevertheless certain suggestions which seem to be in order.

The first is a negative warning: there is no point in the creation of faculty committees and advisory boards with high-sounding titles but no real authority.

In the case of academic personnel the `` feeling '' of participation can hardly be `` faked ''.

Competent teachers are well versed in the technique of leading students to pre-set conclusions without destroying the students' illusion that they are making their own decisions.

Those who have served as faculty advisers are too familiar with the useful but artificial mechanisms of student government to be taken in by `` busy-work '' and ersatz decision making.

In any case it is by no means clear that formally structured organs of participation are what is called for at all.

In the Notre Dame report, reference was made to the fact that faculty members were reduced to `` luncheon-table communication ''.

In itself there is nothing wrong with this form of `` participation '': the only difficulty on the Catholic campus is that those faculty members who are in a position to implement policy, i.e., members of the religious community which owns and administers the institution, have their own eating arrangements.

Sen. John L. McClellan of Arkansas and Rep. David Martin of Nebraska are again beating the drums to place the unions under the anti-monopoly laws.

Once more the fallacious equation is advanced to argue that since business is restricted under the anti-monopoly laws, there must be a corresponding restriction against labor unions: the law must treat everybody equally.

Or, in the words of Anatole France, `` The law in its majestic equality must forbid the rich, as well as the poor, from begging in the streets and sleeping under bridges ''.

The public atmosphere that has been generated which makes acceptance of this law a possibility stems from the disrepute into which the labor movement has fallen as a result of Mr. McClellan's hearings into corruption in labor-management relations and, later, into the jurisdictional squabbles that plagued industrial relations at the missile sites.

The Senator was shocked by stoppages over allegedly trivial disputes that delayed our missile program.

In addition, disclosures that missile workers were earning sums far in excess of what is paid for equivalent work elsewhere provoked his indignation on behalf of the American taxpayer who was footing the bill.

It is now disclosed that the taxpayer not only pays for high wages, but he pays the employers' strike expenses when the latter undertakes to fight a strike.

Business Week( Aug. 9, 1961) reports that the United Aircraft Company, against which the International Association of Machinists had undertaken a strike, decided to keep its plants operating.

The company incurred some $10 million of expenses attributable to four factors: advertising to attract new employees, hiring and training them, extra overtime, and defective work performed by the new workers.

The company has billed the United States Government for $7,500,000 of these expenses under the Defense Department regulation allowing costs of a type generally recognized as ordinary and necessary for the conduct of the contractor's business.

Rep. Frank Kowalski of Connecticut has brought this problem to the attention of the Armed Services Committee.

The committee remains unresponsive.

Neither has Congressman Martin nor Senator McClellan been heard from on the matter;;

they are preoccupied with ending labor abuses by extending the anti-monopoly laws to the unions.

The recent publicity attending the successful federal prosecution of a conspiracy indictment against a number of electrical manufacturers has evoked a new respect for the anti-trust laws that is justified neither by their rationale nor by the results they have obtained.

The anti-trust laws inform a business that it must compete, but along completely undefined lines;;

it must play a game in which there never is a winner.

The fact is that any business that wants to operate successfully cannot follow the law.

Hypocrisy thus becomes the answer to a foolish public policy.

Let us look at the heavy-electrical-goods industry in which General Electric, Westinghouse and a number of other manufacturers were recently convicted of engaging in a conspiracy to rig prices and allocate the market.

The industry is so structured that price-setting by a multi-product company will vary with the way overhead charges are allocated -- whether marginal or average pricing is applied.

The problem becomes even more complex where an enterprise is engaged in the manufacture of a wide variety of other goods in addition to the heavy electrical equipment.

Accounting procedures can be varied to provide a rationale for almost any price.

Naturally, enterprises of the size of General Electric are in a position to structure their prices in such a way that the relatively small competitors can be forced to the wall in a very short time.

Should these giants really flex their competitive muscles, they would become the only survivors in the industry.

Uncle Sam would then accuse them of creating a monopoly by `` unfair competition ''.

But if they show self-restraint, they don't get the orders.

Under the circumstances, the only protection for the relatively small manufacturers is to engage in exactly the kind of conspiracy with the giants for which the latter were convicted.

Engaging in such a conspiracy was an act of mercy by the giants.

The paradox implicit in the whole affair is shown by the demand of the government, after the conviction, that General Electric sign a wide-open consent decree that it would not reduce prices so low as to compete seriously with its fellows.

In other words, the anti-trust laws, designed to reduce prices to the consumer on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, become a tool to protect the marginal manufacturer on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.

And which theory would govern the enforcers of the law on Sunday??

The question might be asked: `` Don't the managements of the heavy-electrical-goods manufacturers know these facts??

Why did they engage in a flood of mea culpas, throw a few scapegoats to the dogs and promise to be good boys thereafter, expressing their complete confidence in the laws ''??

The past usefulness of the anti-trust laws to management was explained by Thurman Arnold, in The Folklore of Capitalism, back in 1937.

He wrote: ``( P. 211) the anti-trust laws were the answer of a society which unconsciously felt the need of great organizations, and at the same time had to deny them a place in the moral and logical ideology of the social structure.

( P. 214) anti-trust laws became the greatest protection to uncontrolled business dictatorship.

( P. 215) when corporate abuses were attacked, it was done on the theory that criminal penalties would be invoked rather than control.

In this manner, every scheme for direct control broke to pieces on the great protective rock of the anti-trust laws.

( Pp. 228-229) in any event, it is obvious that the anti-trust laws did not prevent the formation of some of the greatest financial empires the world has ever known, held together by some of the most fantastic ideas, all based on the fundamental notion that a corporation is an individual who can trade and exchange goods without control by the government ''.

This escape from control has led to management's evaluating the risk of occasional irrational prosecution as worth while.

A plea of nolo contendere, followed by a nominal fine, after all is a small price to pay for this untrammeled license.

( The penalties handed out in the electrical case, which included jail sentences, were unprecedented in anti-trust prosecutions, perhaps because the conspirators had displayed unusual ineptness in their pricing activities.

)

If a substitute mechanism is needed for the control of a fictitious impersonal market, quite obviously some method must be devised for representing the public interest.

A secret conspiracy of manufacturers is hardly such a vehicle.

However, one can argue that no such control is necessary as long as one pretends that the anti-trust laws are effective and rational.

Quite clearly the anti-trust laws are neither effective nor rational -- and yet the argument goes that they should be extended to the labor union.

Those who favor placing trade unions under anti-trust laws imply that they are advocating a brand new reform.

Before 1933, individuals who opposed trade unions and collective bargaining said so in plain English.

The acceptance of collective bargaining as a national policy in 1934, implicit in the writing of Section 7A of the National Industrial Recovery Act, has made it impolitic to oppose collective bargaining in principle.

The Wagner Act, the Taft-Hartley Act and the Landrum-Griffin Act all endorse the principle of collective bargaining.

The basic purpose of an effective collective-bargaining system is the removal of wages from competition.

If a union cannot perform this function, then collective bargaining is being palmed off by organizers as a gigantic fraud.

The tortured reasoning that unions use to deny their ambition to exercise monopoly power over the supply and price of labor is one of the things that create a legal profession.

The problem must be faced squarely.

If laborers are merely commodities competing against each other in a market place like so many bags of wheat and corn( unsupported, by the way, by any agricultural subsidy), then they may be pardoned for reacting with complete antagonism to a system that imposes such status upon them.

Human labor was exactly that -- a commodity -- in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century America.

As early as 1776, Adam Smith wrote in The Wealth Of Nations: `` We have no acts of Parliament against combining to lower the price of work;;

but many against combining to raise it ''.

Eighteenth-century England, upon whose customs our common law was built, had outlawed unions as monopolies and conspiracies.

In 1825, the Boston house carpenters' strike for a ten-hour day was denounced by the organized employers, who declared: `` It is considered that all combinations by any classes of citizens intended to effect the value of labor tend to convert all its branches into monopolies ''.

There were no pious hypocrisies then about being for collective bargaining, but against labor monopoly.

The courts shared the opinion of the employers.

In People vs. Fisher, Justice Savage of the New York Supreme Court declared:

`` Without any officious and improper interference on the subject, the price of labor or the wages of mechanics will be regulated by the demand for the manufactured article and the value of that which is paid for it;;

but the right does not exist to raise the wages of the mechanic by any forced and artificial means ''.

Compare this statement of a nineteenth-century judge with how Congressman Martin, according to the Daily Labor Report of Sept. 19, 1961, defends the necessity of enacting anti-trust legislation in the field of labor `` if we wish to prevent monopolistic fixing of wages, production or prices and if we wish to preserve the freedom of the employer and his employees to contract on wages, hours and conditions of employment ''.

Senator McClellan is proposing the application of anti-trust measures to unions in transportation.

His bill, allegedly aimed at Hoffa, would amend the Sherman, Clayton and Norris-LaGuardia acts to authorize the issuance of federal injunctions in any transportation strike and would make it illegal for any union to act in concert with any other union -- even a sister local in the same international.

Paradoxically, the same week in which Senator McClellan was attempting to extend the anti-trust act to labor in transportation, the Civil Aeronautics Board was assuring the airlines that if they met in concert to eliminate many costly features of air travel, the action would not be deemed a violation of the anti-trust act.

Indeed, it is in the field of transportation that Congress has most frequently granted employers exemption from the anti-trust laws;;

for example, the organization of steamship conferences to set freight rates and the encouragement of railroads to seek mergers.

At the very moment that every attempt is being made to take management out from under the irrationality of anti-trust legislation, a drive is on to abolish collective bargaining under the guise of extending the anti-monopoly laws to unions who want no more than to continue to set wages in the same way that ship operators set freight rates.

The passage of the Sherman Act was aimed at giant monopolies.

It was most effective against trade unions.

In the famous Danbury Hatters case, a suit was brought against the union by the Loewe Company for monopolistic practices, e.g., trying to persuade consumers not to purchase the product of the struck manufacturer.

The suit against the union was successful and many workers lost their homes to pay off the judgment.

In 1914, the Clayton Act attempted to take labor out from under the anti-trust legislation by stating that human labor was not to be considered a commodity.

The law could not suspend economics.

Labor remained a commodity -- but presumably a privileged one granted immunization from the anti-trust laws.

The courts, by interpretation, emasculated the act.

In 1922, the United Mine Workers struck the Coronado Coal Company.

The company sued under the anti-trust laws, alleging that the union's activity interfered with the movement of interstate commerce.

( What other purpose could a striking union have but to interrupt the flow of commerce from the struck enterprise??

) The court first ruled that the strike constituted only an indirect interference with commerce.

The nation

the three-front war

At a closed-door session on Capitol Hill last week, Secretary of State Christian Herter made his final report to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on U.S. affairs abroad.

Afterward, Tennessee's Democratic Senator Albert Gore summed it up for newsmen.

What Herter presented, said Gore, was `` not a very encouraging review ''.

That was something of an understatement in a week when the underlying conflict between the West and Communism erupted on three fronts.

While Communists were undermining United Nations efforts to rescue the Congo from chaos, two other Communist offensives stirred the Eisenhower Administration into emergency conferences and serious decisions.

1) Cuba.

Hours after a parade of his new Soviet tanks and artillery, Dictator Fidel Castro suddenly confronted the U.S. with a blunt and drastic demand: within 48 hours, the U.S. had to reduce its embassy and consulate staffs in Cuba to a total of eleven persons( the embassy staff alone totaled 87 U.S. citizens, plus 120 Cuban employees).

President Eisenhower held an 8:30 a.m. meeting with top military and foreign-policy advisers, decided to break off diplomatic relations immediately.

`` There is a limit to what the United States in self-respect can endure '', said the President.

`` That limit has now been reached ''.

Through Secretary Herter, Ike offered President-elect Kennedy an opportunity to associate his new Administration with the breakoff decision.

Kennedy, through Secretary-designate of State Dean Rusk, declined.

He thus kept his hands free for any action after Jan. 20, although reaction to the break was generally favorable in the U.S. and Latin America( see the hemisphere).

2) Laos.

After a White House huddle between the President and top lieutenants, the Defense Department reacted sharply to a cry from the pro-Western government of Laos that several battalions of Communist troops had invaded Laos from North Viet Nam.

`` In view of the present situation in Laos '', said the Pentagon's announcement, `` we are taking normal precautionary actions to increase the readiness of our forces in the Pacific ''.

Cutting short a holiday at Hong Kong, the aircraft carriers Lexington and Bennington steamed off into the South China Sea, accompanied by a swarm of destroyers, plus troopships loaded with marines.

On the U.S.'s island base of Okinawa, Task Force 116, made up of Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force units, got braced to move southward on signal.

But by week's end the Laotian cry of invasion was read as an exaggeration( see foreign news), and the U.S. was agreeing with its cautious British and French allies that a neutralist -- rather than a pro-Western -- government might be best for Laos.

French& Indians.

There was a moral of sorts in the Laotian situation that said much about all other cold-war fronts.

Political, economic and military experts were all agreed that chaotic, mountainous little Laos was the last place in the world to fight a war -- and they were probably right.

`` It would be like fighting the French and Indian War all over again '', said one military man.

But why was Laos the new Southeast Asian battleground??

At Geneva in 1954, to get the war in Indo-China settled, the British and French gave in to Russian and Communist Chinese demands and agreed to the setting up of a Communist state, North Viet Nam -- which then, predictably, became a base for Communist operations against neighboring South Viet Nam and Laos.

The late Secretary of State John Foster Dulles considered the 1954 Geneva agreement a specimen of appeasement, saw that resolution would be needed to keep it from becoming a calamity for the West.

He began the diplomatic discussions that resulted in the establishment of Aj.

`` The important thing from now on '', he said, `` is not to mourn the past but to seize the future opportunity to prevent the loss in northern Viet Nam from leading to the extension of Communism throughout Southeast Asia ''.

Russian tanks and artillery parading through the streets of Havana, Russian intrigue in the Congo, and Russian arms drops in Laos( using the same Ilyushin transports that were used to carry Communist agents to the Congo) made it plain once more that the cold war was all of a piece in space and time.

Soviet Premier Khrushchev sent New Year's hopes for peace to President-elect Kennedy, and got a cool acknowledgment in reply.

Considering the state of the whole world, the cold war's three exposed fronts did not seem terribly ominous;;

but, in Senator Gore's words, it was `` not a very encouraging '' situation that would confront John F. Kennedy on Inauguration Day.

The Congress

turmoil in the House

As the 87th Congress began its sessions last week, liberal Democrats were ready for a finish fight to open the sluice gates controlled by the House Rules Committee and permit the free flow of liberal legislation to the floor.

The liberal pressure bloc( which coyly masquerades under the name Democratic Study Group) had fought the committee before, and had always lost.

This time, they were much better prepared and organized, and the political climate was favorable.

They had the unspoken support of President-elect Kennedy, whose own legislative program was menaced by the Rules Committee bottleneck.

And counting noses, they seemed to have the votes to work their will.

Deadly deadlock.

There were two possible methods of breaching the conservative barriers around the Rules Committee: 1) to pack it with additional liberals and break the conservative-liberal deadlock, or 2) to remove one of the conservatives -- namely Mississippi's 14-term William Meyers Colmer( pronounced Calmer).

Caucusing, the liberals decided to go after Colmer, which actually was the more drastic course, since seniority in the House is next to godliness.

A dour, gangling man with a choppy gait, Colmer looks younger than his 70 years, has gradually swung from a moderate, internationalist position to that of a diehard conservative.

He is generally and initially suspicious of any federal project, unless it happens to benefit his Gulf Coast constituents.

He is, of course, a segregationist, but he says he has never made an `` anti-Negro '' speech.

For 20 years he has enjoyed his power on the Rules Committee.

There his vote, along with those of Chairman Howard Smith, the courtly Virginia judge, and the four Republican members, could and often did produce a 6-6 deadlock that blocked far-out, Democratic-sponsored welfare legislation( a tactic often acceptable to the Rayburn-Johnson congressional leadership to avoid embarrassing votes).

Equal treatment.

There was sufficient pretext to demand Colmer's ouster: he had given his lukewarm support to the anti-Kennedy electors in Mississippi.

Reprisals are not unheard of in such situations, but the recent tendency has been for the Congress to forgive its prodigal sons.

In 1949 the Dixiecrats escaped unscathed after their 1948 rebellion against Harry Truman, and in 1957, after Congressman Adam Clayton Powell campaigned for Dwight Eisenhower in 1956, his fellow Democrats did not touch his committee assignments, although they did strip him temporarily of his patronage.

( In the heat of the anti-Colmer drive last week, Judge Smith threatened reprisal against Powell.

Said he: `` We will see whether whites and Negroes are treated the same around here ''.

) But Speaker Sam Rayburn, after huddling in Palm Beach with President-elect Kennedy, decided that this year something had to be done about the Rules Committee -- and that he was the only man who could do anything effective.

In a tense, closed-door session with Judge Smith, Rayburn attempted to work out a compromise: to add three new members to the Rules Committee( two Democrats, including one Southerner, and one Republican).

Smith flatly rejected the offer, and Mister Sam thereupon decided to join the rebels.

The next morning he summoned a group of top Democrats to his private office and broke the news: he would lead the fight to oust Colmer, whom he is said to regard as `` an inferior man ''.

News of Rayburn's commitment soon leaked out.

When Missouri's Clarence Cannon got the word, he turned purple.

`` Unconscionable ''!!

He shouted, and rushed off to the Speaker's Room to object: `` A dangerous precedent ''!!

Cannon, a powerful, conservative man, brought welcome support to the Smith-Colmer forces: as chairman of the Appropriations Committee, he holds over each member the dreadful threat of excluding this or that congressional district from federal pork-barrel projects.

Sitting quietly on an equally big pork barrel was another Judge Smith ally, Georgia's Carl Vinson, chairman of the Armed Services Committee.

Threat of war.

As the battle raged in the cloakrooms and caucuses, it became clear that Judge Smith could lose.

His highest count of supporters numbered 72 -- and he needed nearly twice that number to control the 260-member Democratic caucus.

The liberals, smelling blood, were faced with the necessity of winning three big votes -- in the Democratic Committee on Committees, in the full party caucus, and on the floor of the House -- before they could oust Colmer.

( One big question: If Colmer was to be purged, what should the House do about the other three senior Mississippians who supported the maverick electors??

) In all three arenas, they seemed certain of victory -- especially with Sam Rayburn applying his whiplash.

But in the prospect of winning the battle loomed the specter of losing a costlier war.

If the Southerners were sufficiently aroused, they could very well cut the Kennedy legislative program to ribbons from their vantage point of committee chairmanships, leaving Sam Rayburn leading a truncated, unworkable party.

With that possibility in mind, Arkansas' Wilbur Mills deliberately delayed calling a meeting of the Committee on Committees, and coolheaded Democrats sought to bring Rayburn and Smith together again to work out some sort of face-saving compromise.

`` Here are two old men, mad at each other and too proud to pick up the phone '', said a House Democratic leader.

`` One wants a little more power, and the other doesn't want to give up any ''.

Battle in the senate

The Senate launched the 87th Congress with its own version of an ancient liberal-conservative battle, but in contrast with the House's guerrilla war it seemed as pro forma as a Capitol guide's speech.

Question at issue: How big a vote should be necessary to restrict Senate debate -- and thereby cut off legislation-delaying filibusters??

A wide-ranging, bipartisan force -- from Minnesota's Democratic Hubert Humphrey to Massachusetts' Republican Leverett Saltonstall -- was drawn up against a solid phalanx of Southern Democrats, who have traditionally used the filibuster to stop civil rights bills.

New Mexico's Clint Anderson offered a resolution to change the Senate's notorious Rule 22 to allow three-fifths of the Senators present and voting to cut off debate, instead of the current hard-to-get two-thirds.

Fair Dealer Humphrey upped the ante, asked cloture power for a mere majority of Senators.

Georgia's Dick Russell objected politely, and the battle was joined.

Privately, the liberals admitted that the Humphrey amendment had no chance of passage.

Privately, they also admitted that their hopes for Clint Anderson's three-fifths modification depended on none other than Republican Richard Nixon.

In 1957 Nixon delivered a significant opinion that a majority of Senators had the power to adopt new rules at the beginning of each new Congress, and that any rules laid down by previous Congresses were not binding.

Armed with the Nixon opinion, the Senate liberals rounded up their slim majority and prepared to choke off debate on the filibuster battle this week.

Hopefully, the perennial battle of Rule 22 then would be fought to a settlement once and for all.

Republicans

last act

Since Election Day, Vice President Richard Nixon had virtually retired -- by his own wish -- from public view.

But with the convening of the new Congress, he was the public man again, presiding over the Senate until John Kennedy's Inauguration.

One day last week, Nixon faced a painful constitutional chore that required him to officiate at a joint session of Congress to hear the official tally of the Electoral College vote, and then to make `` sufficient declaration '' of the election of the man who defeated him in the tight 1960 presidential election.

Nixon fulfilled his assignment with grace, then went beyond the required `` sufficient declaration ''.

`` This is the first time in 100 years that a candidate for the presidency announced the result of an election in which he was defeated '', he said.

The Masters golf tournament proved last Monday what it can do to the strongest men and the staunchest nerves.

Gary Player, the small, trim South African, was the eventual winner, but in all his 25 years he never spent a more harrowing afternoon as he waited for the victory to drop in his lap.

Arnold Palmer, the defending champion, lost his title on the 72nd hole after a few minutes of misfortune that left even his fellow pros gaping in disbelief.

`` Just when you think you have it licked, this golf course can get up and bite you '', Player had said one afternoon midway through the tournament.

And that is just what happened on the last few holes.

The Augusta National Golf Club Course got up and bit both Player and Palmer.

Player was the first to feel its teeth.

After playing a splendid first nine holes in 34 -- two strokes under par -- on this fifth and final day of the tournament( Sunday's fourth round had been washed out by a violent rainstorm when it was only half completed), Player's game rapidly fell to pieces.

He bogeyed the 10th.

After a journey through woods and stream he double-bogeyed the 13th.

He bogeyed the 15th by missing a short putt and finally scrambled through the last three holes without further mishap for a 2-over-par 74 and a 72-hole total of 280.

As he signed his scorecard and walked off the course, Player was almost in tears.

He could read on the nearby scoreboard that Palmer, by then playing the 15th hole, was leading him by a stroke.

Palmer had started the round four strokes behind Player, and at one point in the afternoon had trailed by as many as six strokes.

Now all he had to do was finish in even par to collect the trophy and the biggest single paycheck in golf.

When Palmer hit a good straight drive up the fairway on the 72nd hole, he seemed to have the championship won.

But the seven-iron shot he used to approach the green strayed into a bunker and lodged in a slight depression.

In trying to hit it out with a sand wedge Palmer bounced the ball over the green, past spectators and down the slope toward a TV tower.

Afterwards, Palmer told Charlie Coe, his last-round partner, that he simply played the hole too fast.

He did seem hasty on his second and third shots, but then there was an agonizing wait of several minutes while Coe graciously putted out, giving Palmer a chance to recover his composure, which he had quite visibly lost.

When the shaken Palmer finally did hit his fourth shot, he overshot the hole by 15 feet.

Palmer was now putting merely for a tie, and Player, who was sitting beside his wife and watching it all on television in Tournament Chairman Clifford Roberts' clubhouse apartment, stared in amazement when Palmer missed the putt.

Palmer's 281 for the four rounds at Augusta was a comfortable four strokes ahead of the next closest pro, but it was barely good enough for a second-place tie with Coe.

The lean and leathery Oklahoma amateur, who has been playing topnotch tournament golf for many years, refused to let the Masters jitters overtake him and closed the tournament with his second straight 69.

End at seven

Until late last Saturday afternoon Palmer had played seven consecutive rounds of golf at the Masters -- four last year and three this -- without ever being out of first place.

As evening approached and Palmer finished his Saturday round with a disappointing one-over-par 73, this remarkable record was still intact, thanks to his Thursday and Friday rounds of 68 and 69.

His three-round total of 210 was three strokes better than the next best score, a 213 by Bill Collins, the tall and deliberate Baltimorean who had been playing very well all winter long.

But Palmer knew, as did everybody else at Augusta, that his streak was about to be broken.

Half an hour after he finished his round, Player holed out at the 18th green with a 69 and a three-round total of 206, four strokes ahead of Palmer.

More than a streak had ended.

Long after the erratic climate and the washed-out final round on Sunday have become meteorological footnotes, the 1961 Masters will be remembered as the scene of the mano a mano between Arnold Palmer and Gary Player.

Unlike most such sports rivalries, it appeared to have developed almost spontaneously, although this was not exactly the case.

When the winter tour began at Los Angeles last January there was no one in sight to challenge Palmer's towering prestige.

As if to confirm his stature, he quickly won three of the first eight tournaments.

Player won only one.

But as the tour reached Pensacola a month ago, Player was leading Palmer in official winnings by a few hundred dollars, and the rest of the field was somewhere off in nowhere.

On the final round at Pensacola, the luck of the draw paired Palmer and Player in the same threesome and, although it was far from obvious at the time, the gallery was treated to the first chapter of what promises to be one of the most exciting duels in sport for a long time to come.

On that final Sunday at Pensacola neither Palmer nor Player was leading the tournament and, as it turned out, neither won it.

But whichever of these two finished ahead of the other would be the undisputed financial leader of the tour.

Player immediately proved he was not in the least awed by the dramatic proximity of Palmer.

He outplayed Palmer all around the course and finished with a tremendous 65 to Palmer's 71.

Thereafter, until the Masters, Player gradually increased his lead over Palmer in winnings and added one more tournament victory at Miami.

When they reached Augusta last week, together they had won five of the 13 tournaments to date.

Instant rivalry

On Thursday, the first day of the Masters, the contest between Palmer and Player developed instantly.

It was a dismal, drizzly day but a good one on which to score over the Augusta National course.

The usually skiddy greens were moist and soft, so the golfers were able to strike their approach shots boldly at the flag-stick and putt firmly toward the hole without too much worry about the consequences.

Palmer's 4-under-par 68 got him off to an early lead, which he shared with Bob Rosburg.

But Player was only one stroke back, with a 69.

Even so, it was still not clear to many in the enormous horde of spectators -- unquestionably the largest golf crowd ever -- that this tournament was to be, essentially, a match between Palmer and Player.

A lot of people were still thinking about Jack Nicklaus, the spectacular young amateur, who had a 70;;

or Ken Venturi, who had a somewhat shaky 72 but was bound to do better;;

or Rosburg, whose accurate short game and supersensitive putter can overcome so many of Augusta's treacheries;;

or even old Byron Nelson, whose excellent 71 made one wonder if he had solved the geriatric aspects of golf.

( On Thursday nobody except Charlie Coe was thinking of Charlie Coe.

)

On Friday, a day as cloudless and lovely as Thursday had been gray and ugly, the plot of the tournament came clearly into focus.

Rosburg had started early in the day, and by the time Palmer and Player were on the course -- separated, as they were destined to be for the rest of the weekend, by about half an hour -- they could see on the numerous scoreboards spotted around the course that Rosburg, who ended with a 73, was not having a good day.

As Player began his second round in a twosome with amateur Bill Hyndman, his share of the gallery was not conspicuously large for a contender.

Player began with a birdie on the first hole, added five straight pars and then another birdie at the 9th.

On the back nine he began to acquire the tidal wave of a gallery that stayed with him the rest of the tournament.

He birdied the 13th, the 15th and the 18th -- five birdies, one bogey and 12 pars for a 68.

Starting half an hour behind Player in company with British Open Champion Kel Nagle, Palmer birdied the 2nd, the 9th, the 13th and the 16th -- four birdies, one bogey and 13 pars for a 69.

The roar of Palmer's gallery as he sank a thrilling putt would roll out across the parklike landscape of Augusta, only to be answered moments later by the roar of Player's gallery for a similar triumph.

At one point late in the day, when Palmer was lining up a 25-foot putt on the 16th, a thunderous cheer from the direction of the 18th green unmistakably announced that Player had birdied the final hole.

Without so much as a grimace or a gesture to show that he had noticed( although he later admitted that he had) Palmer proceeded to sink his 25-footer, and his gallery sent its explosive vocalization rolling back along the intervening fairways in reply.

The boldness of champions

Anyone who now doubted that a personal duel was under way had only to watch how these exceptionally gifted golfers were playing this most difficult golf course.

It is almost axiomatic that golfers who dominate the game of golf for any period of time attack their shots with a vehemence bordering on violence.

The bad luck that can so often mar a well-played round of golf is simply overpowered and obliterated by the contemptuous boldness of these champions.

Bob Jones played that way.

Byron Nelson did, Hogan did.

And last week at the Masters Palmer and Player did.

As the third round of the tournament began on Saturday and the duel was resumed in earnest, it was Player's superior aggressiveness that carried him into the lead.

This day Palmer had started first.

As Player stepped on the first tee he knew that Palmer had birdied the first two holes and already was 2 under par for the day.

Player immediately proceeded to follow suit.

In fact, he went on to birdie the 6th and 8th as well, to go 4 under par for the first eight holes.

But Player's real test came on the ninth hole, a downhill dogleg to the left measuring 420 yards.

He hit a poor tee shot, pulling it off into the pine woods separating the 9th and first fairways.

Having hit one of the trees, the ball came to rest not more than 160 yards out.

Player then had the choice of punching the ball safely out of the woods to the 9th fairway and settling for a bogey 5, or gambling.

The latter involved hitting a full four-wood out to the first fairway and toward the clubhouse, hoping to slice it back to the deeply bunkered 9th green.

`` I was hitting the ball well '', Player said later, `` and I felt strong.

When you're playing like that you'd better attack ''.

Player attacked with his four-wood and hit a shot that few who saw it will ever forget.

It struck the 9th green on the fly and stopped just off the edge.

From there he chipped back and sank his putt for a par 4.

Palmer, meanwhile, had been having his troubles.

They started on the 4th hole, a 220-yard par-3.

On this day the wind had switched 180-degrees from the northwest to the southeast, and nearly every shot on the course was different from the previous few days.

At the 4th tee Palmer chose to hit a one-iron when a three-wood was the proper club, so he put the ball in a bunker in front of the green.

His bogey 4 on this hole and subsequent bogeys at 5 and 7 along with a birdie at 8 brought him back to even par.

Starting the second nine, Palmer was already four strokes behind Player and knew it.

When Mickey Charles Mantle, the New York Yankees' man of muscle, drives a home run 450 feet into the bleachers, his feat touches upon the sublime.

When Roger Eugene Maris, Mantle's muscular teammate, powers four home runs in a double-header, his performance merits awe.

But when tiny, 145-pound Albert Gregory Pearson of the Los Angeles Angels, who once caught three straight fly balls in center field because, as a teammate explained, `` the other team thought no one was out there '', hits seven home runs in four months( three more than his total in 1958, 1959, and 1960), his achievement borders on the ridiculous.

This is Baseball 1961.

This is the year home runs ranged from the sublime to the ridiculous.

It is the year when( 1) amiable Jim Gentile of the Baltimore Orioles ambled to the plate in consecutive innings with the bases loaded and, in unprecedented style, delivered consecutive grand-slam home runs;;

( 2) Willie Mays of the San Francisco Giants borrowed a teammate's bat and became the ninth big leaguer to stroke four home runs in a game;;

( 3) the Milwaukee Braves tied a major-league record with fourteen home runs in three games and lost two of them;;

and( 4) catcher Johnny Blanchard of the New York Yankees matched a record with home runs in four successive times at bat, two of them as a pinch-hitter.

Pitchers grumble about lively balls and lively bats, the shrinking strike zone, and the fact that the knock-down pitch is now illegal.

Experts point to the thinning of pitching talent in the American League caused by expansion.

Whatever the reasons, not in 30 years has a single season produced such thunderous assaults upon the bureau of baseball records, home-run division.

Of all the records in peril, one stands apart, dramatic in its making, dramatic in its endurance, and now, doubly dramatic in its jeopardy.

This, of course, is baseball's most remarkable mark: The 60 home runs hit in 1927 by the incorrigible epicure, the incredible athlete, George Herman( Babe) Ruth of the Yankees.

Since 1927, fewer than a dozen men have made serious runs at Babe Ruth's record and each, in turn, has been thwarted.

What ultimately frustrated every challenger was Ruth's amazing September surge.

In the final month of the 1927 season, he hit seventeen home runs, a closing spurt never matched.

Double threat:

Always, in the abortive attacks upon Ruth's record, one man alone -- a Jimmy Foxx( 58 in 1932) or a Hank Greenberg( 58 in 1938) or a Hack Wilson( 56 in 1930) -- made the bid.

But now, for the first time since Lou Gehrig( with 47 home runs) spurred Ruth on in 1927, two men playing for the same team have zeroed in on 60.

Their names are Mantle and Maris, their team is the Yankees, and their threat is real.

After 108 games in 1927, Ruth had 35 home runs.

After 108 games in 1961, Mickey Mantle has 43, Roger Maris 41.

Extend Mantle's and Maris's present paces over the full 1961 schedule of 162 games, and, mathematically, each will hit more than 60 home runs.

This is the great edge the two Yankees have going for them.

To better Ruth's mark, neither needs a spectacular September flourish.

All Mantle needs is eight more home runs in August and ten in September, and he will establish a new record.

In Ruth's day -- and until this year -- the schedule was 154 games.

Baseball commissioner Ford Frick has ruled that Ruth's record will remain official unless it is broken in 154 games.

)

`` Even on the basis of 154 games, this is the ideal situation '', insists Hank Greenberg, now vice-president of the Chicago White Sox.

`` It has to be easier with two of them.

How can you walk Maris to get to Mantle ''??

Roommates:

Neither Mantle nor Maris, understandably, will predict 60 home runs for himself.

Although both concede they would like to hit 60, they stick primarily to the baseball player's standard quote: `` The important thing is to win the pennant ''.

But one thing is for certain: There is no dissension between Mantle, the American League's Most Valuable Player in 1956 and 1957, and Maris, the MVP in 1960.

Each enjoys seeing the other hit home runs( `` I hope Roger hits 80 '', Mantle says), and each enjoys even more seeing himself hit home runs( `` and I hope I hit 81 '').

The sluggers get along so well in fact, that with their families at home for the summer( Mantle's in Dallas, Maris's in Kansas City), they are rooming together.

Mantle, Maris, and Bob Cerv, a utility outfielder, share an apartment in Jamaica, Long Island, not far from New York International Airport.

The three pay $251 a month for four rooms( kitchen, dining room, living room, and bedroom), with air-conditioning and new modern furniture.

Mantle and Cerv use the twin beds in the bedroom;;

Maris sleeps on a green studio couch in the living room.

They divide up the household chores: Cerv does most of the cooking( breakfast and sandwich snacks, with dinner out), Mantle supplies the transportation( a white 1961 Oldsmobile convertible), and Maris drives the 25-minute course from the apartment house to Yankee Stadium.

Mantle, Maris, and Cerv probably share one major-league record already: Among them, they have fifteen children -- eight for Cerv, four for Mantle, and three for Maris.

As roommates, teammates, and home-run mates, Mantle, 29, who broke in with the Yankees ten years ago, and Maris, 26, who came to the Yankees from Kansas City two years ago, have strikingly similar backgrounds.

Both were scholastic stars in football, basketball, and baseball( Mantle in Commerce, Okla., Maris in Fargo, N.D.);;

as halfbacks, both came close to playing football at the University of Oklahoma( `` Sometimes in the minors '', Maris recalls, `` I wished I had gone to Oklahoma '').

To an extent, the two even look alike.

Both have blue eyes and short blond hair.

Both are 6 feet tall and weigh between 195 and 200 pounds, but Mantle, incredibly muscular( he has a 17-1/2-inch neck), looks bigger.

With their huge backs and overdeveloped shoulders, both must have their clothes made to order.

Maris purchases $100 suits from Simpson's in New York.

Mantle, more concerned with dress, buys his suits four at a time at Neiman-Marcus in Dallas and pays as much as $250 each.

Light reading:

Neither Mantle nor Maris need fear being classified an intellectual, but lately Mantle has shown unusual devotion to an intellectual opus, Henry Miller's `` Tropic of Cancer ''.

Mantle so appreciated Miller's delicate literary style that he broadened teammates' minds by reading sensitive passages aloud during road trips.

Mantle is not normally given to public speaking -- or, for that matter, to private speaking.

`` What do you and Mickey talk about at home ''??

A reporter asked Maris recently.

`` To tell you the truth '', Maris said, `` Mickey don't talk much ''.

This is no surprising trait for a ballplayer.

What is surprising and pleasant is that Mantle and Maris, under constant pressure from writers and photographers, are trying to be cooperative.

Of the two, Mantle is by nature the less outgoing, Maris the more outspoken.

But last week, when a reporter was standing near Mantle's locker, Mickey walked up and volunteered an anecdote.

`` See that kid ''??

He said, pointing to a dark-haired 11-year-old boy.

`` That's( Yogi) Berra's.

I'll never forget one time I struck out three times, dropped a fly ball, and we lost the game.

I came back, sitting by my locker, feeling real low, and the kid walks over to me, looks up, and says:' You stunk' ''.

Maris, in talking to reporters, tries to answer all questions candidly and fully, but on rare occasions, he shuns newsmen.

`` When I've made a dumb play '', he says, `` I don't want to talk to anyone.

I'm angry ''.

By his own confession, Maris is an angry young man.

Benched at Tulsa in 1955, he told manager Dutch Meyer: `` I can't play for you.

Send me where I can play ''.

( Meyer sent him to Reading, Pa..

) Benched at Indianapolis in 1956, he told manager Kerby Farrell: `` I'm not learning anything on the bench.

Play me ''.

( Farrell did -- and Maris led the team to victory in the Little World Series.

) `` That's the way I am '', he says.

`` I tell people what I think.

If you're a good ballplayer, you've got to get mad.

Give me a team of nine angry men and I'll give you a team of nine gentlemen and we'll beat you nine out of ten times ''.

Idols' idols:

One good indication of the two men's personalities is the way they reacted to meeting their own heroes.

Maris's was Ted Williams.

`` When I was a kid '', Maris told a sportswriter last week, `` I used to follow Williams every day in the box score, just to see whether he got a hit or not ''.

`` When you came up to the majors, did you seek out Williams for advice ''??

`` Are you kidding ''??

Said Maris.

`` You're afraid to talk to a guy you idolize ''.

Mantle's hero was Joe DiMaggio.

`` When Mickey went to the Yankees '', says Mark Freeman, an ex-Yankee pitcher who sells mutual funds in Denver, `` DiMaggio still was playing and every day Mickey would go by his locker, just aching for some word of encouragement from this great man, this hero of his.

But DiMaggio never said a word.

It crushed Mickey.

He told me he vowed right then that if he ever got to be a star, this never would be said of him ''.

Mantle has kept the vow.

Among all the Yankees, he is the veteran most friendly to rookies.

Neither Mantle nor Maris is totally devoted to baseball above all else.

If laying ties on a railroad track, which he once did for $1 an hour, paid more than playing right field for the Yankees, Maris would lay ties on a railroad track.

If working in a zinc mine, which he once did for 87-1/2 cents an hour, paid more than playing center field for the Yankees, Mantle would work in a zinc mine.

But since railroading and mining are not the highest paid arts, Mantle and Maris concentrate on baseball.

They try to play baseball the best they can.

Each is a complete ballplayer.

Mantle, beyond any question, can do more things well.

( `` One of the reasons they get along fine '', says a sportswriter who is friendly with the two men, `` is that both realize Mantle is head-and-shoulders above Maris ''.

) Hitting, Mantle has an immediate advantage because he bats both left-handed and right-handed, Maris only left-handed.

They both possess near classic stances, dug in firmly, arms high, set for fierce swings.

Mantle is considerably better hitting for average(

, fourth in the league, to

for Maris so far this year).

Both are good bunters: Maris once beat out eighteen of nineteen in the minor leagues;;

Mantle is a master at dragging a bunt toward first base.

Both have brilliant speed: Mantle was timed from home plate( batting left-handed) to first base in 3.1 seconds, faster than any other major leaguer;;

Maris ran the 100-yard dash in ten seconds in high school and once won a race against Luis Aparicio, the swift, base-stealing shortstop of the White Sox.

Both are good, daring fielders: Mantle covers more ground;;

Maris's throwing arm is stronger.

Yet with all their skills, the appeal of Mantle and Maris in 1961 comes down to one basic: The home run.

With this ultimate weapon, the two Yankees may have saved baseball from its dullest season.

( American League expansion created, inevitably, weaker teams.

Only two teams in each league( the Yankees and Detroit, the Dodgers and Cincinnati) are battling for first place.

Appropriately, the emphasis on the home run, at a peak this year, came into being at baseball's lowest moment.

In 1920, as the startling news that the 1919 White Sox had conspired to lose the World Series leaked out, fans grew disillusioned and disinterested in baseball.

Something was needed to revive interest;;

the something was the home run.

Into Washington on President-elect John F. Kennedy's Convair, the Caroline, winged Actor-Crooner Frank Sinatra and his close Hollywood pal, Cinemactor Peter Lawford, Jack Kennedy's brother-in-law.

Also included in the entourage: a dog in a black sweater, Frankie and Peter had an urgent mission: to stage a mammoth Inauguration Eve entertainment gala in the capital's National Guard Armory.

Frankie was fairly glutted with ideas, as he had hinted upon his arrival: `` It's really tremendous when you think Ella Fitzgerald is coming from Australia.

I could talk to you for three hours and still not be able to give you all of our plans ''!!

As the plans were laid, some several thousand fat cats were to be ensconced in the armory's $100 seats and in 68 ringside boxes priced at $10,000 each.

The biggest single act would doubtless be staged by Frankie himself: his Inaugural wardrobe had been designed by Hollywood Couturier Don Loper, who regularly makes up ladies' ensembles.

Soon after Loper leaked the news that Frankie had ordered `` two of everything '' just `` in case he spills anything '', Frankie got so mad at the chic designer that he vowed he would not wear a stitch of Loper clothing.

A year after he was catapulted over nine officers senior to him and made commandant of the Marine Corps, General David M. Shoup delivered a peppery annual report in the form of a `` happy, warless New Year '' greeting to his Pentagon staff.

Said Leatherneck Shoup: `` A year ago I took the grips of the plow in my hands.

After pushing an accumulation of vines and weeds from the moldboard, I lifted the lines from the dust and found hitched to that plow the finest team I ever held a rein on.

Little geeing and hawing have been necessary ''.

But Shoup also gave the Corps a tilling in spots.

Speaking of `` pride '', he deplored the noncommissioned officer `` whose uniform looks like it belonged to someone who retired in 1940;;

the officer with the yellow socks or the bay window.

A few of these people are still around ''.

Old and new briefly crossed paths in the U.S. Senate, then went their respective ways.

At a reception for new members of Congress, Oregon Democrat Maurine Neuberger, taking the Senate seat held by her husband Richard until his death last March, got a brotherly buss from Democratic Elder Statesman Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador-designate to the U.N..

Meanwhile, after 24 years in the Senate, Rhode Island's durable Democrat Theodore Francis Greene -- having walked, swum and cerebrated himself to the hearty age of 93 -- left that august body( voluntarily, because he could surely have been re-elected had he chosen to run again last November), as the oldest man ever to serve in the Senate.

The most famous undergraduate of South Philadelphia High School is a current bobby-sox idol, Dreamboat Cacophonist Fabian( real name: Fabian Forte), 17, and last week it developed that he will remain an undergraduate for a while.

The principal of the school announced that -- despite the help of private tutors in Hollywood and Philadelphia -- Fabian is a 10-o'clock scholar in English and mathematics.

Lacking his needed credits in those subjects, Fabian will not graduate with his old classmates next week.

South Philadelphia High's principal added that the current delay was caused by the `` pressure '' of a movie that the toneless lad was making.

To Decathlon Man Rafer Johnson( Time cover, Aug. 29), whose gold medal in last summer's Olympic Games was won as much on gumption as talent, went the A.A.U.'s James E. Sullivan Memorial Trophy as the outstanding U.S. amateur athlete of 1960.

As the world's top sportsman -- pro or amateur -- Sports Illustrated tapped golf's confident Arnold Palmer( Time cover, May 2), who staged two cliffhanging rallies to win both the Masters and U.S. Open crowns, went on to win a record $80,738 for the year.

Tooling through Sydney on his way to race in the New Zealand Grand Prix, Britain's balding Ace Driver Stirling Moss, 31, all but smothered himself in his own exhaust of self-crimination.

`` I'm a slob '', he announced.

`` My taste is gaudy.

I'm useless for anything but racing cars.

I'm ruddy lazy, and I'm getting on in years.

It gets so frustrating, but then again I don't know what I could do if I gave up racing ''.

Has Moss no stirling virtues??

`` I appreciate beauty ''.

One of Nikita Khrushchev's most enthusiastic eulogizers, the U.S.S.R.'s daily Izvestia, enterprisingly interviewed Red-prone Comedian Charlie Chaplin at his Swiss villa, where he has been in self-exile since 1952.

Chaplin, 71, who met K. when the Soviet boss visited England in 1956, confided that he hopes to visit Russia some time this summer because `` I have marveled at your grandiose experiment and I believe in your future ''.

Then Charlie spooned out some quick impressions of the Nikita he had glimpsed: `` I was captivated by his humor, frankness and good nature and by his kind, strong and somewhat sly face ''.

G. David Thompson is one of those names known to the stewards of transatlantic jetliners and to doormen in Europe's best hotels, but he is somewhat of an enigma to most people in his own home town of Pittsburgh.

There the name vaguely connotes new-rich wealth, a reputation for eccentricity, and an ardor for collecting art.

Last week, in the German city of Dusseldorf, G. David Thompson was making headlines that could well give Pittsburgh pause.

On display were 343 first-class paintings and sculptures from his fabled collection -- and every single one of them was up for sale.

Like Philadelphia's late Dr. Albert C. Barnes who kept his own great collection closed to the general public( Time, Jan. 2), Thompson, at 61, is something of a legend in his own lifetime.

He made his fortune during World War 2, when he took over a number of dying steel plants and kept them alive until the boom.

Even before he hit big money, he had begun buying modern paintings.

He gave the impression of never having read a word about art, but there was no doubt that he had an eye for the best.

He was able to smell a bargain -- and a masterpiece -- a continent away, and the Museum of Modern Art's Alfred Barr said of him: `` I have never mentioned a new artist that Thompson didn't know about ''.

He might barge into a gallery, start haggling over prices without so much as a word of greeting.

He could be lavishly generous with friends, cab drivers and bellboys, but with dealers he was tough.

He bought up Cezannes, Braques, Matisses, Legers, a splendid Picasso series, more than 70 Giacometti sculptures.

He gathered one of the biggest collections of Paul Klees in the world.

All these he hung in his burglarproof home called Stone's Throw, outside Pittsburgh, and only people he liked and trusted ever got to see them.

Two years ago Thompson offered his collection to the city.

But he insisted that it be housed in a special museum.

Pittsburgh turned him down, just as Pittsburgh society had been snubbing him for years.

He went then to a 40-year-old Basel art dealer named Ernst Beyeler, with whom he had long been trading pictures.

Last year Beyeler arranged to sell $1,500,000 worth of Klees to the state of North Rhine-Westphalia, which will house them in a museum that is yet to be built.

Last week most of the other prizes, once offered to Pittsburgh, went on the block.

At the opening of the Dusseldorf show, Thompson himself scarcely glanced at the treasures that he was seeing together for the last time.

In fact he seemed delighted to get rid of them.

Some observers speculated that this might be his revenge on his home town.

Thompson himself said: `` I want to enjoy once more the pleasure of bare walls waiting for new pictures ''.

Break in Georgia

The University of Georgia has long claimed that it does not discriminate against any applicant on the basis of race or color.

But in all its 175 years, not a single Negro student has entered its classrooms.

Last week Federal District Judge William A. Bootle ordered the university to admit immediately a `` qualified '' Negro boy and girl.

Their entry will crack the total segregation of all public education, from kindergarten through graduate school, in Georgia -- and in Alabama, Mississippi and South Carolina as well.

For 18 months, Hamilton Holmes, 19, and Charlayne Hunter, 18, had tried to get into the university.

They graduated together from Atlanta's Turner High School, where Valedictorian Holmes was first in the class and Charlayne third.

The university rejected them on a variety of pretexts, but was careful never to mention the color of their skins.

Holmes went to Atlanta's Morehouse( Negro) College, where he is a B student and star halfback.

Charlayne studied journalism at Detroit's Wayne State University.

Last fall, after they took their hopes for entering Georgia to court, Judge Bootle ordered them to apply again.

Charlayne was `` tentatively '' admitted for next fall, after state investigators questioned her white roommate at Wayne State.

But Holmes was rejected again `` on the basis of his record and interview ''.

The evidence in court was testimony about the interview, which for Holmes lasted an hour, although at least one white student at Georgia got through this ritual by a simple phone conversation.

Holmes was asked if he had ever visited a house of prostitution, or a `` beatnik parlor or teahouse ''.

No, said he, but officials still called him `` evasive ''.

They also said he lied in saying that he had never been `` arrested ''.

Their reason: Holmes once paid a $20 speeding fine, had his license suspended.

Negro lawyers dug into the records of 300 white students, found that many were hardly interviewed at all -- and few had academic records as good as Hamilton Holmes.

The real reason for his rejection, they argued, is the fact that Georgia law automatically cuts off funds for any desegregated school.

Judge Bootle's decision: `` The two plaintiffs are qualified for admission to said university and would already have been admitted had it not been for their race and color ''.

The state will appeal -- but few think it will actually try to close the university.

`` Surprised and pleased '', Students Holmes and Hunter may enter the University of Georgia this week.

Catch for Chicago

When the University of Chicago's Chancellor Lawrence A. Kimpton submitted his resignation last March, a mighty talent hunt gripped the Midway.

Out went letters to 60,000 old grads, asking for suggestions.

Such academic statesmen as James B. Conant were consulted.

Two committees pondered 375 possible Kimpton successors, including Adlai Stevenson, Richard Nixon, and Harvard's Dean McGeorge Bundy.

The debate led to a decision that Chicago needed neither a big name nor an experienced academic administrator, but rather, as Trustee Chairman Glen A. Lloyd put it, `` a top scholar in his own right '' -- a bright light to lure other top scholars to Chicago.

Last week Chicago happily found its top scholar in Caltech's acting dean of the faculty: dynamic Geneticist George Wells Beadle, 57, who shared the 1958 Nobel Prize in medicine and physiology for discovering how genes affect heredity by controlling cell chemistry( Time, Cover, July 14, 1958).

It fell to Chancellor Kimpton, now a Standard Oil( Indiana) executive, to spend his nine-year reign tidying up Chicago after the 21-year typhoon of Idealist Robert Maynard Hutchins.

He threw out some of Hutchins' more wildly experimental courses, raised sagging undergraduate enrollment to 2,100, nearly doubled endowment to $139.3 million.

But though Kimpton put Chicago in what he felt was working order, some old grads feel that it still needs the kind of lively teachers who filled it in the heady Hutchins era.

At Caltech, Geneticist Beadle has stuck close to his research as head of the school's famous biology division since 1946.

But he has shown a sixth-sense ability to spot, recruit and excite able researchers, and has developed unexpected talents in fund raising and speech-making.

Beadle is even that rare scientist who takes an interest in money matters;;

he avidly reads the Wall Street Journal, and took delight in driving a $250 model A Ford for 22 years, then selling it for $300.

A philosopher may point out that the troubles of the Congo began with the old Adam and consequently will never end.

But a historian might put his finger on a specific man and date, and hold out the hope that the troubles will sometime pass away.

The man was King Leopold 2, of the Belgians, who in 1885 concluded that he had better grab a colony while the grabbing was still good.

By force, he took under his protection, or stole, 900,000 square miles of wilderness in Central Africa.

This is an area nearly as large as Western Europe;;

and it was filled then as now by quarreling tribes with no political or historical unity.

Its boundaries had nothing to do with geography or ethnic groupings;;

they were determined by the points at which Leopold's explorers and gunmen got tired of walking.

The population of the Congo is 13.5 million, divided into at least seven major `` culture clusters '' and innumerable tribes speaking 400 separate dialects.

The religions of the people include Christianity, Mohammedanism, paganism, ancestor worship and animism.

The climate ranges from the steamily equatorial to the temperate.

The hospitals contain patients trampled by elephants or run over by sports cars.

To make one nation out of these disparities would be a problem large enough in any case;;

it has been made far more difficult by what the Belgians have done, or failed to do, in the Congo since 1885.

At first the Belgian royal family administered the Congo as its own private property.

But by 1908 its record of brutality had touched the national conscience.

The Belgian government itself took over administration, commencing a program of paternalism unmatched in the history of colonialism.

One definition of paternalism is `` The principle or practice, on the part of a government, of managing the affairs of a country in the manner of a father dealing with his children ''.

The honor of the Belgians in this matter is not to be questioned -- only their judgment.

Ordinarily a father permits his children to grow up in due time -- but when the colony received independence in 1960 the Congolese child, if one imagines him to have been born in 1908, was 52 and had until then been treated as an infant.

The Belgians were interested primarily in the economic development of the Congo, which is rich in copper, tin, cobalt, manganese, zinc, and uranium, and cotton and palm oil.

The colony was administered from Brussels, with neither the Congolese nor the resident Belgians having any vote.

The beneficiaries of this administration were a number of huge cartels in which both individuals and the Belgian government itself held stock.

In Inside Africa, John Gunther describes one of these, the Societe Generale, as `` the kind of colossus that might be envisaged if, let us say, the House of Morgan, Anaconda Copper, the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, the Pennsylvania Railroad, and various companies producing agricultural products were lumped together, with the United States government as a heavy partner ''.

Had they been truly ruthless, the Belgians might have exploited the Congolese without compassion.

But they were not.

They provided a social security system which covered all their African employes;;

their program of mass medical care was doubtless the best on the continent;;

they put much effort into public housing.

They also instituted a ration system under which all employers in the Congo were required to furnish their employes with clothing and adequate food.

But instead of delivering the ration -- either in actual commodities or in cash -- at intervals of perhaps two weeks or a month, the Belgians felt obliged to dole it out more often.

Would not the children, if they received all their food on the first day of the month, eat it up immediately, and later go hungry??

The Belgians also placed great emphasis on education.

During the 1950s there were as many as 25,000 schools in the Congo.

But almost all the schools were primary.

The average Congolese can do little more than puzzle out the meaning of `` la chatte '' and `` le chien '' and write his name.

Some schools were technical -- the Belgians needed carpenters and mechanics to help exploit the land, and trained many.

But they did not believe in widespread secondary education, much less in college.

It was their conviction that the people should be `` brought up together '', a grade at a time, until in some indefinite future some might be ready to tackle history, economics and political science.

Indeed, the Belgians discouraged higher education, fearing the creation of a native intellectual elite which might cause unrest.

When the Congo received its independence in 1960 there were, among its 13.5 million people, exactly 14 university graduates.

Why did the Belgians grant independence to a colony so manifestly unprepared to accept it??

In one large oversimplification, it might be said that the Belgians felt, far too late, the gale of nationalism sweeping Africa.

They lacked time to prepare the Congo, as the British and French had prepared their colonies.

The Congolese were clamoring for their independence, even though most were unsure what it meant;;

and in Brussels, street crowds shouted, `` Pas une goutte de sang!!

''( Not one drop of blood!!

).

The Belgians would not fight for the privilege of being the detested pedagogue;;

rather than teach where teaching was not wanted, they would wash their hands of the mess.

It is hard to blame them for this.

Yet there were other motivations and actions which the Belgians took after independence for which history may not find them guiltless.

As the time for independence approached there were in the Congo no fewer than 120 political parties, or approximately eight for each university graduate.

There were four principal ones.

First, there were those Congolese( among them Joseph Kasavubu) who favored splitting the country into small independent states, Balkanizing it.

Second, there were those( Moise Tshombe) who favored near-Balkanization, a loose federalism having a central government of limited authority, with much power residing in the states.

Third, there were those( notably Patrice Lumumba) who favored a unified Congo with a very strong central government.

And fourth, there were moderates who were in no hurry for independence and wished to wait until the Congo grew up.

However, the positions of all parties and leaders were constantly shifting.

A final factor which contributed greatly to the fragmentation of the Congo, immediately after independence, was the provincial structure that had been established by the Belgians for convenience in administration.

They had divided the Congo into six provinces -- Leopoldville, Kasai, Kivu, Katanga, Equator and Eastern -- unfortunately with little regard for ethnic groupings.

Thus some provinces contained tribes which detested each other, and to them independence meant an opportunity for war.

The Belgian Congo was granted its independence with what seemed a workable Western-style form of government: there were to be a president and a premier, and a bicameral legislature elected by universal suffrage in the provinces.

Well-wishers around the world hoped that the Congo would quickly assume a respectable position in the society of nations.

If internal frictions arose, they could be handled by the 25,000-man Congolese army, the Force Publique, which had been trained and was still officered by white Belgians.

The president, Joseph Kasavubu, seemed an able administrator and the premier, Patrice Lumumba, a reasonable man.

Twenty-four hours after independence the wild tribesmen commenced fighting each other.

Presently the well-armed members of the Force Publique -- many of them drawn from savage and even cannibalistic tribes, erupted in mutiny, rioting, raping and looting.

Terror engulfed the thousands of Belgian civilians who had remained in the country.

The Belgian government decided to act, and on July 10 dispatched paratroops to the Congo.

On July 11 the head of the mineral-rich province of Katanga, Moise Tshombe, announced that his province had seceded from the country.

Confusion became chaos;;

each succeeding day brought new acts of violence.

Lumumba and Kasavubu blamed it all on the military intervention by the Belgians, and appealed to the United Nations to send troops to oust them.

On July 14 the Security Council -- with France and Great Britain abstaining -- voted the resolution which drew the U.N. into the Congo.

Vague in wording, it called for withdrawal of Belgian troops and authorized the Secretary-General `` to take the necessary steps to provide the( Congolese) Government with such military assistance as may be necessary, until, through the efforts of the Congolese Government with the technical assistance of the United Nations, the national security forces may be able, in the opinion of the Government, to meet fully their tasks.

''

Secretary-General Hammarskjold decided that it would be preferable if the U.N. troops sent into the Congo were to come from African, or at least nonwhite, nations -- certainly not from the U.S., Russia, Great Britain or France.

He quickly called on Ghana, Tunisia, Morocco, Guinea and Mali, which dispatched troops within hours.

Ultimately the U.N. army in the Congo reached a top strength of 19,000, including about 5,000 from India and a few soldiers from Eire and Sweden, who were the only whites.

It took the U.N. three months to bring a modest form of order to the Congo.

The Belgians were reluctant to withdraw their troops and often obstructed U.N. efforts.

The wildly erratic nature of Patrice Lumumba caused constant problems -- he frequently announced that he wanted the U.N. to get out of the Congo along with the Belgians, and appealed to Russia for help.

( However, there is little evidence that the late Lumumba was a Communist.

Before appealing to the U.N. or to Russia, he first appealed to the U.S. for military help, and was rejected.

) Lumumba further complicated the U.N.'s mission by initiating small `` wars '' with the secessionist province of Katanga and with South Kasai which, under Albert Kalonji, wanted to secede as well.

Meanwhile Russia took every opportunity to meddle in the Congo, sending Lumumba equipment for his `` wars '', dispatching `` technicians '' and even threatening, on occasion, to intervene openly.

But by the end of the three-month period, in October 1960, something approaching calm settled on the Congo.

President Kasavubu became exasperated with Lumumba and fired him.

Lumumba fired Kasavubu.

Control of the government -- such control as there was and such government as there was -- passed into the hands of Joseph Mobutu, chief of staff of the Congolese army.

Mobutu promptly flung out the Russians, who have not since played any significant part on the local scene, although they have redoubled their obstructionist efforts at U.N. headquarters in New York.

The Belgians -- at least officially -- departed from the Congo as well, withdrawing all of their uniformed troops.

But they left behind them large numbers of officers, variously called `` volunteers '' or `` mercenaries '', who now staff the army of Moise Tshombe in Katanga, the seceded province which, according to Tshombe, holds 65% of the mineral wealth of the entire country.

From October 1960 to February 1961, the U.N. forces in the Congo took little action.

There was no directive for it -- the Security Council's resolution had not mentioned political matters, and in any case the United Nations by the terms of its charter may not interfere in the political affairs of any nation, whether to unify it, federalize it or Balkanize it.

During the five-month lull, civil war smoldered and flickered throughout the Congo.

In February the murder of Patrice Lumumba, who had been kidnaped into Katanga and executed on order of Tshombe, again stirred the U.N. to action.

On Feb. 21 the council passed another resolution urging the taking of `` all appropriate measures to prevent the occurrence of civil war in the Congo, including the use of force, if necessary, in the last resort ''.

Although the resolution might have been far more specific, it was considerably tougher than the earlier one.

It also urged that the U.N. eject, and prevent the return of, all Belgian and other foreign military and political advisers;;

ordered an investigation of Lumumba's death;;

urged the reconvention of the Congolese Parliament and the reorganization of the army.

The presidency: talking and listening

Though President John F. Kennedy was primarily concerned with the crucial problems of Berlin and disarmament adviser McCloy's unexpected report from Khrushchev, his new enthusiasm and reliance on personal diplomacy involved him in other key problems of U.S. foreign policy last week.

High up on the President's priority list was the thorny question of Bizerte.

On this issue, the President received a detailed report from his U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, who had just returned from Paris, and Mr. Kennedy asked Stevenson to search for a face-saving way -- for both Paris and Tunis -- out of the imbroglio.

Ideally, the President would like the French to agree on a `` status quo ante '' on Bizerte, and accept a new timetable for withdrawing their forces from the Mediterranean base.

To continue their important conversations about the Tunisian issue and the whole range of other problems, Mr. Kennedy invited Stevenson to Cape Cod for the weekend.

The President also discussed the Bizerte deadlock with the No. 2 man in the Tunisian Government, Defense Minister Bahi Ladgham, who flew to Washington last week to seek U.S. support.

The conversation apparently convinced Mr. Kennedy that the positions of France and Tunisia were not irreconcilable.

Through Ladgham, Mr. Kennedy sent a message along those lines to Tunisian President Habib Bourguiba;;

and one U.S. official said: `` The key question now is which side picks up the phone first ''.

On the Latin American front, the President held talks with Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon before sending him to Uruguay and the Inter-American Economic and Social Council( which the President himself had originally hoped to attend).

Main purpose of the meeting: To discuss President Kennedy's Alliance for Progress.

And that was not all.

In conferences with Nationalist China's dapper, diminutive Vice President Chen Cheng, Mr. Kennedy assured Chiang Kai-shek's emissary that the U.S. is as firmly opposed as ever to the admission of Red China to the United Nations.

Chen was equally adamant in his opposition to the admission of Outer Mongolia;;

however the President, who would like to woo the former Chinese province away from both Peking and Moscow, would promise Chen nothing more than an abstention by the U.S. if Outer Mongolia's admission comes to a vote.

The President also conferred with emissaries from Guatemala and Nepal who are seeking more foreign aid.

To Africa, he sent his most trusted adviser, his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, on a good-will mission to the Ivory Coast.

All week long the President clearly was playing a larger personal role in foreign affairs;;

in effect, he was practicing what he preached in his Berlin message two weeks ago when he declared: `` We shall always be prepared to discuss international problems with any and all nations that are willing to talk, and listen, with reason ''.

Crime:' skyjacked'

From International Airport in Los Angeles to International Airport in Houston, as the great four-jet Boeing 707 flies, is a routine five hours and 25 minutes, including stopovers at Phoenix, El Paso, and San Antonio.

When Continental Airlines night-coach Flight 54 took off at 11:30 one night last week, there was no reason to think it would take any longer.

The plane put down on schedule at 1:35 a.m. in Phoenix.

Thirty-one minutes later, when it took off for El Paso, hardly anyone of the crew of six or the 65 other passengers paid any attention to the man and teen-age boy who had come aboard.

At 3:57 a.m., with the plane about twenty minutes out of El Paso, passenger Robert Berry, a San Antonio advertising man, glanced up and saw the man and boy, accompanied by a stewardess, walking up the aisle toward the cockpit.

`` The man was bent over with his hand on his stomach '', Berry said.

`` I figured he was sick ''.

John Salvador, a farmer from Palm Desert, Calif., was sitting up front and could see through the door as the trio entered the cockpit.

`` The kid had a automatic, like they issue in the Army '', he said.

`` The other fellow had a ''.

Salvador saw the youth hold his against the head of stewardess Lois Carnegey;;

the man put his at the head of Capt. Byron D. Rickards.

To Rickards, a 52-year-old veteran 30 years in the air, it was an old story: His plane was being hijacked in mid-flight again much as it had happened in 1930, when Peruvian rebels made him land a Ford tri-motor at Arequipa.

But last week's pirates, like the Cuban-American who recently hijacked an Eastern Airlines Electra( Newsweek, Aug. 7), wanted to go to Havana.

Stalling:

`` Tell your company there are four of us here with guns '', the elder man told Rickards.

The pilot radioed El Paso International Airport with just that message.

But, he told the `` skyjackers '', the 707 didn't carry enough fuel to reach Havana;;

they would have to refuel at El Paso.

Most passengers didn't know what had happened until they got on the ground.

Jerry McCauley of Sacramento, Calif., one of some twenty Air Force recruits on board, awoke from a nap in confusion.

`` The old man came from the front of the plane and said he wanted four volunteers to go to Cuba '', McCauley said, `` and like a nut I raised my hand.

I thought he was the Air Force recruiter ''.

What the man wanted was four persons to volunteer as hostages, along with the crew.

They chose four: Jack Casey, who works for Continental Airlines in Houston;;

Fred Mullen from Mercer Island, Wash.;;

Pfc. Truman Cleveland of St. Augustine.

Fla., and Leonard Gilman, a former college boxer and veteran of the U.S. Immigration Service Border Patrol.

Everybody else was allowed to file off the plane after it touched down at El Paso at 4:18 a.m..

They found a large welcoming group -- El Paso policemen, Border Patrol, sheriff's deputies, and FBI men, who surged around the plane with rifles and submachine guns.

Other FBI men, talking with the pilot from the tower, conspired with him to delay the proposed flight to Havana.

The ground crew, which ordinarily fuels a 707 in twenty minutes, took fully three hours.

Still more time was consumed while the pilot, at the radioed suggestion of Continental president Robert Six, tried to persuade the armed pair to swap the Boeing jet for a propeller-driven Douglas Aj.

Actually, the officers on the ground had no intention of letting the hijackers get away with any kind of an airplane;;

they had orders to that effect straight from President Kennedy, who thought at first, as did most others, that it was four followers of Cuba's Fidel Castro who had taken over the 707.

Mr. Kennedy had been informed early in the day of the attempt to steal the plane, kept in touch throughout by telephone.

At one time, while still under the impression that he was dealing with a Cuban plot, the President talked about invoking a total embargo on trade with Cuba.

As the morning wore on and a blazing West Texas sun wiped the shadows off the Franklin Mountains, police got close enough to the plane to pry into the baggage compartment.

From the luggage, they learned that the two air pirates, far from being Cubans, were native Americans, subsequently identified as Leon Bearden, 50-year-old ex-convict from Coolidge, Ariz., and his son, Cody, 16, a high-school junior.

Tension

The heat and strain began to tell on the Beardens.

The father, by accident or perhaps to show, as he said, `` we mean business '', took the and fired a slug between the legs of Second Officer Norman Simmons.

At 7:30 a.m., more than three hours after landing, the Beardens gave an ultimatum:

Take off or see the hostages killed.

The tower cleared the plane for take-off at 8 a.m., and Captain Rickards began taxiing toward the runway.

Several police cars, loaded with armed officers, raced alongside, blazing away at the tires of the big jet.

The slugs flattened ten tires and silenced one of the inboard engines;;

the plane slowed to a halt.

Ambulances, baggage trucks, and cars surrounded it.

The day wore on.

At 12:50 p.m. a ramp was rolled up to the plane.

A few minutes later, FBI agent Francis Crosby, talking fast, eased up the ramp to the plane, unarmed.

While Crosby distracted the Beardens, stewardesses Carnegey and Toni Besset dropped out of a rear door.

So did hostages Casey, Cleveland, and Mullen.

That left only the four crew members, Crosby, and Border Patrolman Gilman, all unarmed, with the Beardens.

The elder Bearden had one pistol in his hand, the other in a hip pocket.

Gilman started talking to him until he saw his chance.

He caught officer Simmons' eye, nodded toward young Bearden, and -- `` I swung my right as hard as I could.

Simmons and Crosby jumped the boy and it was all over ''.

Frog-marched off the airplane at 1:48 p.m., the Beardens were held in bail of $100,000 each on charges of kidnapping and transporting a stolen plane across state lines.

( Bearden reportedly hoped to peddle the plane to Castro, and live high in Cuba.

) Back home in Coolidge, Ariz., his 36-year-old wife, Mary, said: `` I thought they were going to Phoenix to look for jobs ''.

Congress: more muscle

Taking precedence over all other legislation on Capitol Hill last week was the military strength of the nation.

The Senate put other business aside as it moved with unaccustomed speed and unanimity to pass -- 85 to 0 -- the largest peacetime defense budget in U.S. history.

With the money all but in hand, however, the Administration indicated that, instead of the 225,000 more men in uniform that President Kennedy had requested, the armed forces would be increased by only 160,000.

The `` hold-back '', as Pentagon mutterers labeled it, apparently was a temporary expedient intended to insure that the army services are built up gradually and, thus, the new funds spent prudently.

In all, the Senate signed a check for $46.7 billion, which not only included the extra $3.5 billion requested the week before by President Kennedy, but tacked on $754 million more than the President had asked for.

( The Senate, on its own, decided to provide additional B-52 and other long-range bombers for the Strategic Air Command.

) The House, which had passed its smaller appropriation before the President's urgent call for more, was expected to go along with the increased defense budget in short order.

In other areas, Congressional action last week included:

The Senate( by voice vote) and the House( by 224-170) passed and sent to the White House the compromise farm bill which the President is expected to sign, not too unhappily.

The Senate also voted $5.2 billion to finance the government's health, welfare, and labor activities.

Debate on the all-important foreign-aid bill, with its controversial long-range proposals, had just begun on the Senate floor at the weekend.

White House legislative aides were still confident the bill would pass intact.

Food: stew a la Mulligatawny

Most members of the U.S. Senate, because they are human, like to eat as high on the hog as they can.

But, because they are politicians, they like to talk as poor-mouth as the lowliest voter.

As a result, ever since 1851 when the Senate restaurant opened in the new wing of the Capitol Building, the senators have never ceased to grumble about the food -- even while they opposed every move that might improve it.

Over the years, enlivened chiefly by disputes about the relative merits of Maine and Idaho potatoes, the menu has pursued its drab all-American course.

Individual senators, with an eye to the voters back home, occasionally introduced smelts from Michigan, soft-shell crabs from Maryland, oysters from Washington, grapefruit from Florida.

But plain old bean soup, served daily since the turn of the century( at the insistence of the late Sen. Fred Dubois of Idaho), made clear to the citizenry that the Senate's stomach was in the right place.

In a daring stroke, the Senate ventured forth last week into the world of haute cuisine and hired a $10,000-per-year French-born maitre d'hotel.

Holders of toll-road bonds are finding improvements in monthly reports on operation of the turnpikes.

Long-term trend of traffic on these roads seems clearly upward.

Higher toll rates also are helping boost revenues.

Result is a better prospect for a full payoff by bonds that once were regarded as highly speculative.

Things are looking up these days for many of the State turnpikes on which investors depend for income from their toll-road bonds.

Traffic on nearly all the turnpikes has been growing.

That added traffic means rising streams of dimes and quarters at toll gates.

As a result of the new outlook for turnpikes, investors who bought toll-road bonds when these securities ranked as outright speculations are now finding new hope for their investments.

Another result is that buyers are tending to bid up the prices of these tax-exempt bonds.

Other tax-exempt bonds of State and local governments hit a price peak on February 21, according to Standard& Poor's average.

On balance, prices of those bonds have slipped a bit since then.

However, in the same three-month period, toll-road bonds, as a group, have bucked this trend.

On these bonds, price rises since February 21 easily outnumber price declines.

Tax-free returns.

Investors, however, still see an element of more-than-ordinary risk in the toll-road bonds.

You find the evidence of that in the chart on this page.

Many of the toll-road bonds still are selling at prices that offer the prospect of an annual yield of 4 per cent, or very close to that.

And this is true in the case of some turnpikes on which revenues have risen close to, or beyond, the point at which the roads start to pay all operating costs plus annual interest on the bonds.

That 4 per cent yield is well below the return to be had on good corporation bonds.

It's not much more, in fact, than the return that is offered on U. S. Treasury bonds.

For investors whose income is taxed at high rates, though, a tax-free yield of 4 per cent is high.

It is the equivalent of 8 per cent for an unmarried investor with more than $16,000 of income to be taxed, or for a married couple with more than $32,000 of taxed income.

Swelling traffic.

A new report on the earnings records of toll roads in the most recent 12-month period -- ending in February or March -- shows what is happening.

The report is based on a survey by Blyth& Company, investment bankers.

Nearly all the turnpikes show gains in net revenues during the period.

And there is the bright note: The gains were achieved in the face of temporary traffic lags late in 1960 and early in 1961 as a result of business recession.

Many of the roads also were hit by an unusually severe winter.

Indication: The long-term trend of turnpike traffic is upward.

Look, for example, at the Ohio Turnpike.

Traffic on that road slumped sharply in January and February, as compared with those same months in 1960.

Then March brought an 18 per cent rise in net revenues -- after operating costs.

As a result, the road's net revenues in the 12 months ending March 31 were 186 per cent of the annual interest payments on the turnpike bonds.

That was up from 173 per cent in the preceding 12 months.

That same pattern of earnings shows up on the Massachusetts Turnpike.

Operating revenues were off in the first three months of 1961, but up for the 12 months ending in March.

Costs were held down, despite a bitter winter.

For the year, the road earned 133 per cent of its interest costs, against 121 per cent in the preceding period.

The road's engineers look for further improvement when the turnpike is extended into Boston.

Slow successes.

Some turnpikes have not been in full operation long enough to prove what they can do.

The 187-mile Illinois State Toll Highway, for example, was not opened over its entire length until December, 1958.

In the 12 months ended in February, 1960, the highway earned enough to cover 64 per cent of its interest load -- with the remainder paid out of initial reserves.

In the 12 months ended in February, 1961, this highway earned 93 per cent of its interest.

That improvement is continuing.

In the first two months of 1961, earnings of the Illinois highway available for interest payments were up 55 per cent from early 1960.

Success, for many turnpikes, has come hard.

Traffic frequently has failed to measure up to engineers' rosy estimates.

In these cases, the turnpike managements have had to turn to toll-rate increases, or to costly improvements such as extensions or better connections with other highways.

Many rate increases already have been put into effect.

Higher tolls are planned for July 1, 1961, on the Richmond-Petersburg, Va., Turnpike, and proposals for increased tolls on the Texas Turnpike are under study.

Easier access.

Progress is being made, too, in improving motorists' access to many turnpikes.

The Kansas Turnpike offers an illustration.

Net earnings of that road rose from 62 per cent of interest requirements in calendar 1957 to 86 per cent in the 12 months ended Feb. 28, 1961.

Further improvements in earnings of the Kansas Turnpike are expected late in 1961, with the opening of a new bypass at Wichita, and still later when the turnpike gets downtown connections in both Kansas City, Kans., and Kansas City, Mo..

Meanwhile, there appears to be enough money in the road's reserve fund to cover the interest deficiency for eight more years.

For some roads, troubles.

Investors studying the toll-road bonds for opportunities find that not all roads are nearing their goals.

Traffic and revenues on the Chicago Skyway have been a great disappointment to planners and investors alike.

If nothing is done, the prospect is that that road will be in default of interest in 1962.

West Virginia toll bonds have defaulted in interest for months, and, despite recent improvement in revenues, holders of the bonds are faced with more of the same.

These, however, are exceptions.

The typical picture at this time is one of steady improvement.

It's going to take time for investors to learn how many of the toll-road bonds will pay out in full.

Already, however, several of the turnpikes are earning enough to cover interest requirements by comfortable margins.

Many others are attracting the traffic needed to push revenues up to the break-even point.

A top American official, after a look at Europe's factories, thinks the U.S. is in a `` very serious situation '' competitively.

Commerce Secretary Luther Hodges, accompanied by a member of our staff, on May 10 toured plants of two of Italy's biggest companies -- Fiat, the auto producer, and Olivetti, maker of typewriters and calculating machines.

Our staff man cabled from Turin as follows --

`` Follow Secretary Hodges through the Fiat plant, and you learn this:

`` One, modern equipment -- much of it supplied under the Marshall Plan -- enables Fiat to turn out 2,100 cars a day.

About half of these are exported.

`` Two, wage costs are a fraction of the U.S. costs.

A skilled worker on the assembly line, for example, earns $37 a week.

`` Three, labor troubles are infrequent.

Fiat officials say they have had no strikes for more than six years.

`` Said Secretary Hodges:' It's a tough combination for the U.S. to face.

`` Olivetti had a special interest for Hodges.

Olivetti took over Underwood, the U.S. typewriter maker, in late 1959.

Within a year, without reducing wages, Underwood's production costs were cut one third, prices were slashed.

The result has been that exports of Underwood products have doubled.

`` The Olivetti plant near Turin has modern layout, modern machinery.

The firm is design-conscious, sales-conscious, advertising-conscious.

`` Hodges is trying to get more foreign business to go to the U.S..

The inflow of foreign capital would help the U.S. balance of payments.

`` Hodges predicted:' I think we will see more foreign firms coming to the U.S..

There are many places where we can use their vigor and new ideas' ''.

Foreign competition has become so severe in certain textiles that Washington is exploring new ways of handling competitive imports.

The recently unveiled Kennedy moves to control the international textile market can be significant for American businessmen in many lines.

Important aspects of the Kennedy textile plans are these:

An international conference of the big textile-importing and textile-exporting countries will be called shortly by President Kennedy.

Chief aims of the proposed conference are worth noting.

The U.S. will try to get agreement among the industrialized countries to take more textile imports from the less-developed countries over the years.

Point is that developing countries often build up a textile industry first, need encouragement to get on their feet.

If they have trouble exporting, international bill for their support will grow larger than it otherwise would.

Idea is to let these countries earn their way as much as possible.

At the same time, another purpose of the conference will be to get certain low-wage countries to control textile exports -- especially dumping of specific products -- to high-wage textile-producing countries.

Japan, since 1957, has been `` voluntarily '' curbing exports of textiles to the U.S..

Hong Kong, India and Pakistan have been limiting exports of certain types of textiles to Britain for several years under the `` Lancashire Pact ''.

None of these countries is happy with these arrangements.

The Japanese want to increase exports to the U.S. While they have been curbing shipments, they have watched Hong Kong step in and capture an expanding share of the big U.S. market.

Hong Kong interests loudly protest limiting their exports to Britain, while Spanish and Portuguese textiles pour into British market unrestrictedly.

The Indians and Pakistanis are chafing under similar restrictions on the British market for similar reasons.

The Kennedy hope is that, at the conference or through bilateral talks, the low-wage textile-producing countries in Asia and Europe will see that `` dumping '' practices cause friction all around and may result in import quotas.

Gradual, controlled expansion of the world's textile trade is what President Kennedy wants.

This may point the way toward international stabilization agreements in other products.

It's an important clue to Washington thinking.

Note, too, that the Kennedy textile plan looks toward modernization or shrinkage of the U.S. textile industry.

`` Get competitive or get out ''.

In veiled terms, that's what the Kennedy Administration is saying to the American textile industry.

The Government will help in transferring companies and workers into new lines, where modernization doesn't seem feasible.

Special depreciation on new textile machinery may be allowed.

Government research will look into new products and methods.

Import quotas aren't ruled out where the national interest is involved.

But the Kennedy Administration doesn't favor import quotas.

Rather, they are impressed with the British Government's success in forcing -- and helping -- the British textile industry to shrink and to change over to other products.

What's happening in textiles can be handwriting on the wall for other lines having difficulty competing with imports from low-wage countries.

Among the highest-paid workers in the world are U.S. coal miners.

Yet U.S. coal is cheap enough to make foreign steelmakers' mouths water.

Steel Company of Wales, a British steelmaker, wants to bring in Virginia coal, cut down on its takings of Welsh coal in order to be able to compete more effectively -- especially in foreign markets.

Virginia coal, delivered by ship in Wales, will be about $2.80 a ton cheaper than Welsh coal delivered by rail from nearby mines.

U.S. coal is cheap, despite high wages, because of widespread mechanization of mines, wide coal seams, attactive rates on ocean freight.

Many of the coal seams in the nationalized British mines are twisting, narrow and very deep.

Productivity of U.S. miners is twice that of the British.

Welsh coal miners, Communist-led, are up in arms at the suggestion that the steel company bring in American coal.

They threaten to strike.

The British Government will have to decide whether to let U.S. coal in.

The British coal industry is unprofitable, has large coal stocks it can't sell.

Every library borrower, or at least those whose taste goes beyond the five-cent fiction rentals, knows what it is to hear the librarian say apologetically, `` I'm sorry, but we don't have that book.

There wouldn't be much demand for it, I'm afraid ''.

Behind this reply, and its many variations, is the ever-present budget problem all libraries must face, from the largest to the smallest.

What to buy out of the year's grist of nearly 15,000 book titles??

What to buy for adult and child readers, for lovers of fiction and nonfiction, for a clientele whose wants are incredibly diversified, when your budget is pitifully small??

Most library budgets are hopelessly inadequate.

A startlingly high percentage do not exceed $500 annually, which includes the librarian's salary, and not even the New York Public has enough money to meet its needs -- this in the world's richest city.

The plight of a small community library is proportionately worse.

Confronted with this situation, most libraries either endure the severe limitations of their budgets and do what they can with what they have, or else depend on the bounty of patrons and local governments to supplement their annual funds.

In some parts of the country, however, a co-operative movement has begun to grow, under the wing of state governments, whereby, with the financial help of the state, libraries share their book resources on a county-wide or regional basis.

New York State has what is probably the most advanced of these co-operative systems, so well developed that it has become a model for others to follow.

Because it is so large a state, with marked contrasts in population density, the organization of the New York co-operative offers a cross-section of how the plan works.

At one extreme are the systems of upper New York State, where libraries in two or more counties combine to serve a large, sparsely populated area.

At the other are organizations like the newly formed Nassau Library System, in a high-density area, with ample resources and a rapidly growing territory to serve.

Both these types, and those in between, are in existence by reason of a legislative interest in libraries that began at Albany as early as 1950, with the creation by the legislature of county library systems financed by county governments with matching funds from the state.

It was a step in the right direction, but it took an additional act passed in 1958 to establish fully the thriving systems of today.

Under this law annual grants are given to systems in substantial amounts.

An earlier difficulty was overcome by making it clear that individual libraries in any area might join or not, as they saw fit.

Some library boards are wary of the plan.

A large, well-stocked library, surrounded in a county by smaller ones, may feel that the demands on its resources are likely to be too great.

A small library may cherish its independence and established ways, and resist joining in a cooperative movement that sometimes seems radical to older members of the board.

Within a system, however, the autonomy of each member library is preserved.

The local community maintains responsibility for the financial support of its own library program, facilities, and services, but wider resources and additional services become available through membership in a system.

All services are given without cost to members.

So obvious are these advantages that nearly 95 per cent of the population of New York State now has access to a system, and enthusiastic librarians foresee the day, not too distant, when all the libraries in the state will belong to a co-op.

To set up a co-operative library system, the law requires a central book collection of 100,000 nonfiction volumes as the nucleus, and the system is organized around it.

The collection may be in an existing library, or it may be built up in a central collection.

Each system develops differently, according to the area it serves, but the universal goal is to pool the resources of a given area for maximum efficiency.

The basic state grant is thirty cents for each person served, and there is a further book incentive grant that provides an extra twenty cents up to fifty cents per capita, if a library spends a certain number of dollars.

In Nassau County, for example, the heavily settled Long Island suburb of New York City, the system is credited by the state with serving one million persons, a figure that has doubled since 1950.

This system, by virtue of its variety and size, offers an inclusive view of the plan in operation.

The Nassau system recognizes that its major task it to broaden reference service, what with the constant expansion of education and knowledge, and the pressure of population growth in a metropolitan area.

The need is for reference works of a more specialized nature than individual libraries, adequate to satisfy everyday needs, could afford.

Nassau is currently building a central collection of reference materials in its Hempstead headquarters, which will reach its goal of 100,000 volumes by 1965.

The major part of this collection is in the central headquarters building, and the remainder is divided among five libraries in the system designated as subject centers.

Basic reference tools are the backbone of the collection, but there is also specialization in science and technology, an indicated weakness in local libraries.

On microfilm, headquarters also has a file of the New York Times from its founding in 1851 to the present day, as well as bound volumes of important periodicals.

The entire headquarters collection is available to the patrons of all members on interlibrary loans.

Headquarters gets about 100 requests every day.

It is connected by teletype with the State Library in Albany, which will supply any book to a system that the system itself cannot provide.

The books are carried around by truck in canvas bags from headquarters to the other libraries.

Each subject center library was chosen because of its demonstrated strength in a particular area, which headquarters could then build upon.

East Meadow has philosophy, psychology, and religion;;

Freeport houses social science, pure science, and language;;

history, biography, and education are centered in Hempstead;;

Levittown has applied science, business, and literature;;

while Hewlett-Woodmere is the repository of art, music, and foreign languages.

The reference coordinator at headquarters also serves as a consultant, and is available to work with the local librarian in helping to strengthen local reference service.

This kind of cooperation is not wholly new, of course.

Public libraries in Nassau County have been lending books to each other by mail for a quarter-century, but the system enables this process to operate on an organized and far more comprehensive basis.

Local libraries find, too, that the new plan saves tax dollars because books can be bought through the system, and since the system buys in bulk it is able to obtain larger discounts than would be available to an individual library.

The system passes on these savings to its members.

Further money is saved through economy in bookkeeping and clerical detail as the result of central billing.

Books are not the only resource of the system.

Schools and community groups turn to the headquarters film library for documentary, art, and experimental films to show at libraries that sponsor local programs, and to organizations in member communities.

The most recent film catalogue, available at each library, lists 110 titles presently in the collection, any of which may be borrowed without charge.

This catalogue lists separately films suitable for children, young adults, or adults, although some classics cut across age groups, such as `` Nanook Of The North '', `` The Emperor's Nightingale '', and `` The Red Balloon ''.

Workshops are conducted by the system's audio-visual consultant for the staffs of member libraries, teaching them the effective use of film as a library service.

The system well understands that one of its primary responsibilities is to bring children and books together;;

consequently an experienced children's librarian at headquarters conducts a guidance program designed to promote well-planned library activities, cooperating with the children's librarians in member libraries by means of individual conferences, workshops, and frequent visits.

Headquarters has also set up a central juvenile book-review and book-selection center, to provide better methods of purchasing and selection.

Sample copies of new books are on display at headquarters, where librarians may evaluate them by themselves or in workshop groups.

Story hours, pre-school programs, activities with community agencies, and lists of recommended reading are all in the province of the children's consultant.

Headquarters of the Nassau system is an increasingly busy place these days, threatening to expand beyond its boundaries.

In addition to the interlibrary loan service and the children's program, headquarters has a public relations director who seeks to get wider grassroots support for quality library service in the county;;

it prepares cooperative displays( posters, booklists, brochures, and other promotional material) for use in member libraries;;

it maintains a central exhibit collection to share displays already created and used;;

and it publishes Sum And Substance, a monthly newsletter, which reports the system's activities to the staffs and trustees of member libraries.

The system itself is governed by a board of trustees, geographically representing its membership.

In Nassau, as in other systems, the long-range objective is to bring the maximum service of libraries to bear on the schools, and on adult education in general.

Librarians, a patient breed of men and women who have borne much with dedication, can begin to see results today.

Library use is multiplying daily, and the bulk of the newcomers are those maligned Americans, the teen-agers.

To them especially the librarians, with the help of co-ops, hope they will never have to say, `` I'm sorry, we don't have that book ''.

Today, more than ever before, the survival of our free society depends upon the citizen who is both informed and concerned.

The great advances made in recent years in Communist strength and in our own capacity to destroy require an educated citizenry in the Western world.

The need for lifetime reading is apparent.

Education must not be limited to our youth but must be a continuing process through our entire lives, for it is only through knowledge that we, as a nation, can cope with the dangers that threaten our society.

The desire and ability to read are important aspects of our cultural life.

We cannot consider ourselves educated if we do not read;;

if we are not discriminating in our reading;;

if we do not know how to use what we do read.

We must not permit our society to become a slave to the scientific age, as might well happen without the cultural and spiritual restraint that comes from the development of the human mind through wisdom absorbed from the written word.

A fundamental source of knowledge in the world today is the book found in our libraries.

Although progress has been made in America's system of libraries it still falls short of what is required if we are to maintain the standards that are needed for an informed America.

The problem grows in intensity each year as man's knowledge, and his capacity to translate such knowledge to the written word, continue to expand.

The inadequacy of our library system will become critical unless we act vigorously to correct this condition.

There are, for example, approximately 25,000,000 people in this country with no public library service and about 50,000,000 with inadequate service.

In college libraries, 57 per cent of the total number of books are owned by 124 of 1,509 institutions surveyed last year by the U.S. Office of Education.

And over 66 per cent of the elementary schools with 150 or more pupils do not have any library at all.

In every aspect of service -- to the public, to children in schools, to colleges and universities -- the library of today is failing to render vitally needed services.

Only public understanding and support can provide that service.

This is one of the main reasons for National Library Week, April 16-22, and for its theme: `` For a richer, fuller life, read ''!!

Dan Morgan told himself he would forget Ann Turner.

He was well rid of her.

He certainly didn't want a wife who was fickle as Ann.

If he had married her, he'd have been asking for trouble.

But all of this was rationalization.

Sometimes he woke up in the middle of the night thinking of Ann, and then could not get back to sleep.

His plans and dreams had revolved around her so much and for so long that now he felt as if he had nothing.

The easiest thing would be to sell out to Al Budd and leave the country, but there was a stubborn streak in him that wouldn't allow it.

The best antidote for the bitterness and disappointment that poisoned him was hard work.

He found that if he was tired enough at night, he went to sleep simply because he was too exhausted to stay awake.

Each day he found himself thinking less often of Ann;;

each day the hurt was a little duller, a little less poignant.

He had plenty of work to do.

Because the summer was unusually dry and hot, the spring produced a smaller stream than in ordinary years.

The grass in the meadows came fast, now that the warm weather was here.

He could not afford to lose a drop of the precious water, so he spent most of his waking hours along the ditches in his meadows.

He had no idea how much time Budd would give him.

In any case, he had no intention of being caught asleep, so he carried his revolver in its holster on his hip and he took his Winchester with him and leaned it against the fence.

He stopped every few minutes and leaned on his shovel as he studied the horizon, but nothing happened, each day dragging out with monotonous calm.

When, in late afternoon on the last day in June, he saw two people top the ridge to the south and walk toward the house, he quit work immediately and strode to his rifle.

It could be some kind of trick Budd had thought up.

No one walked in this country, least of all Ed Dow or Dutch Renfro or any of the rest of the Bar B crew.

Morgan watched the two figures for a time, puzzled.

When they were closer and he saw that one was a woman, he was more puzzled than ever.

He cleaned his shovel, left it against the fence, picked up his Winchester, and started downstream.

His visitors had crawled through the south fence and were crossing the meadow, angling toward the house.

Now he saw that both the man and woman were moving slowly and irregularly, staggering, as if they found it a struggle to remain on their feet.

Reaching the house ahead of them, he waited with his Winchester in his hands.

They crawled through the north fence and came on toward him, and now he saw that both were young, not more than nineteen or twenty.

They were dirty, their clothes were torn, and the girl was so exhausted that she fell when she was still twenty feet from the front door.

She lay there, making no effort to get back on her feet.

The boy came on to the porch and sat down, his gaze on Morgan as if half expecting him to shoot and not really caring.

Morgan hesitated, thinking that if this was a trick, it was a good one.

He didn't think it was possible for this couple to be pretending.

The boy licked his dry lips.

He asked, `` Could we have a drink ''??

Morgan jerked his head toward the front door.

`` In the kitchen '', he said.

Leaning his Winchester against the front of the house, he walked to the girl.

`` Get up.

There's water in the house ''.

She didn't move or say anything.

Her eyes were glazed as if she didn't hear or even see him.

She had reached a point at which she didn't even care how she looked.

Her face was very thin, and burned by the sun until much of the skin was dead and peeling, the new skin under it red and angry.

Her blond hair was frowzy, her dress torn in several places, and her shoes were so completely worn out that they were practically no protection.

It must have hurt her even to walk, for the sole was completely off her left foot and Morgan saw that it was bruised and bleeding.

He picked her up, sliding one hand under her shoulders, the other under her knees, and carried her into the house.

She was amazingly light, and so relaxed in his arms that he wasn't even sure she was conscious.

Any lingering suspicion that this was a trick Al Budd had thought up was dispelled.

No girl would go this far to fool a man so she could kill him.

Besides, she had a sweet face that attracted him.

He put her down on the couch, and going into the kitchen, saw that the boy had dropped into a chair beside the table.

They looked a good deal alike, Morgan thought.

Both had blonde hair and blue eyes, and there was even a faint similarity of features.

Morgan filled the dipper from the water bucket on the shelf, went back into the front room, lifted the girl's head, and held the edge of the dipper to her mouth.

She drank greedily, and murmured, `` Thank you '', as he lowered her head.

He stood looking down at her for a moment, wondering what could have reduced her to this condition.

He had seen a few nester wagons go through the country, the families almost starving to death, but he had never seen any of them on foot and as bad off as these two.

The girl dropped off to sleep.

Morgan returned to the kitchen, built a fire, and carried in several buckets of water from the spring which he poured into the copper boiler that he had placed on the stove.

He brought his Winchester in from the front of the house, then faced the boy.

`` Who are you and what happened to you ''??

He asked.

`` I'm Billy Jones '', the boy answered.

`` That's my wife Sharon.

We ran out of money and we haven't eaten for two days ''.

`` What are you doing here ''??

`` Are we in Wyoming ''??

Morgan nodded.

`` About five miles north of the line ''.

Jones sighed as if relieved.

`` We've been looking for work, but all the ranchers have turned us down ''.

`` You mean you dragged your wife all over hell's half-acre looking for work ''??

Morgan demanded.

`` The town of Buckhorn's only about six miles from here.

Why didn't you go there ''??

`` We didn't want town work '', Jones said.

`` This is a mighty empty country '', Morgan said.

`` There's only one more ranch three miles north of here.

You'd have starved to death if you'd missed both places ''.

`` Then we're lucky we got here.

Could you give us a job, Mr. ''

`` Morgan.

Dan Morgan ''.

He was silent a moment, thinking he could use a man this time of year, and if the girl could cook, it would give him more time in the meadows, but he knew nothing about the couple.

They might kill him in his sleep, thinking there was money in the house.

He dismissed the possibility at once.

The girl's thin face haunted him.

It wasn't the face of a killer.

He wasn't so sure about the boy.

He hadn't shaved for several weeks, his sparse beard giving his face a pathetic, woebegone expression.

There was more to this than Jones had told him.

They were running from something.

He'd be an idiot to let them stay he thought, but he couldn't send them on, either.

`` I could use some help '', Morgan said finally, `` but I can't afford to pay you anything.

I guess you'd better go on in the morning ''.

`` We'll work for our keep '', the boy said eagerly.

`` I've been mucking in a mine in the San Juan, but I used to work on a ranch.

Sharon, she's cooked in a restaurant.

We'll work hard, Mr. Morgan ''.

`` I'll see '', Morgan said.

`` Right now you need a meal and a bath.

Your wife's in terrible shape ''.

`` I know '', Jones said dejectedly.

Morgan filled the fire box with wood again, then started supper and set the table.

When the meal was ready, he told Jones to wash up, and going into the front room, woke the girl.

He said, `` I've got some supper ready ''.

She rubbed her eyes and stretched, then sat up, her hands going to her hair.

`` I'm a mess '', she said, and suddenly she was alarmed.

`` Who are you??

How did we get here ''??

`` I'm Dan Morgan.

This is the Rafter Aj.

You fell down in front of the house, and I carried you in.

I gave you a drink and then you went to sleep ''.

`` Oh ''.

She stared at him, her eyes wide as she thought about what he had said;;

then she murmured: `` You're very kind, Mr. Morgan.

Do you take in all the strays who come by ''??

`` I don't have many strays coming to my front door '', he said.

`` Think you can walk to the table ''??

`` Of course ''.

She got to her feet, staggered, and almost fell.

He caught her by an arm and helped her into the kitchen.

She sat down at the table, shaking her head.

`` I'm sorry, Mr. Morgan.

I'm usually a very strong woman, but I'm awfully tired ''.

`` And hungry '', he said.

`` Start in.

It's not much of a meal, but it's what I eat ''.

`` Not much of a meal ''??

The girl cried.

`` Mr. Morgan, it's the best-looking food I ever saw ''.

He told himself he had never seen two people eat so much.

When they were finally satisfied, Jones said, `` I think he's going to give us work ''.

The grateful way she looked at Morgan made him ashamed of himself.

When he saw the expression in her eyes, he knew he couldn't send them on.

She said, `` I guess the Lord looks out for fools, drunkards, and innocents ''.

Morgan laughed.

`` Which are you ''??

`` We're not drunkards '', she said.

`` That's all I'm sure of ''.

She helped him with the dishes, then he brought more water in from the spring before it got dark.

He carried the tub from the back of the house where it hung from a nail in the wall.

He said: `` You'll feel a lot better after you have a bath.

Your feet are in bad shape, Mrs. Jones.

You'll have to go to town to see the doc ''.

`` No, she'll be all right '', Jones said quickly.

`` I mean, we don't have any way to get there and we can't expect you to quit work just to take us to town ''.

`` We'll see '', Morgan said.

`` Could you find me a needle and thread ''??

The girl asked.

`` My dress needs some work on it ''.

He nodded and, going into the bedroom, brought a needle, thread, and scissors.

He said: `` I'm going to bed ''.

He nodded at the door in front of him.

`` That's my spare bedroom.

The bed isn't made, but you'll find plenty of blankets there ''.

`` You're awfully kind '', the girl said.

`` We'll pay you back if you'll let us.

Some way ''.

`` It's all right '', he said.

`` I get up early.

You'd better sleep ''.

Jones followed him into the front room, closing the door behind him.

He said: `` If it's all right with you, Mr. Morgan, I'll sleep out here on the couch.

We haven't slept together since we started.

I just can't take any chances on getting her pregnant, and if we were sleeping together ''

He stopped, embarrassed, and Morgan said, `` I understand that, but I don't savvy why you'd go off and leave your jobs in the first place ''.

`` We got fired '', Jones said.

`` We had to do something ''.

They were a pair of lost, whipped kids, Morgan thought as he went to bed.

Gavin paused wearily.

`` You can't stay here with me.

It's late and you said they'd be here by dawn ''.

`` You can't make me go ''.

Gavin sank down again into his chair and began to rock.

He was thinking of Rittenhouse and how he had left him there, to rock to death on the porch of the Splendide.

It was the only thing in his life for which he felt guilt.

Beneath his black shirt his frail shoulders shook and croaks of pain broke from his throat, the stored pain shattering free in slow gasps, terrible to see.

Clayton tried to call back the face of the man he had known.

Against that other man he could rally his anger;;

against this bent man in the chair he was powerless.

Gavin's lips moved so that Clayton had to stoop to catch the words.

`` Do you remember Big Charlie ''??

He whispered.

`` He stuck with me all these years.

Just a half-breed 'pache, never said much, never meant anythin to me, but he stuck with me.

He got into a fight with Tom English, your brother's son.

It was a fair fight, the boy provoked it -- Big Charlie told me so.

I believed him.

They killed Big Charlie, dumped his body in my rose garden two nights ago.

My men, they all left me.

Just cleared out.

I didn't understand why, Clay.

They just all cleared out.

I treated them fair ''

He wiped his lips with a sleeve, then stared at Clayton in a childish kind of wonder.

`` Do you mean '' -- he asked almost shyly -- `` you want me to go with you, wherever you're goin ''??

`` Yes ''.

`` You don't hate me any more ''??

Clayton choked, shook his head, murmuring, `` No ''.

`` Come here ''.

The old man beckoned with one finger and Clayton went forward to him.

Gavin slipped his arms around his chest and hugged him fiercely.

`` All my life '', he said, `` I tried.

I tried.

I saw you driftin away -- but I tried.

And you wanted no part of me when I had so much to give.

Now there's nothin left of me.

Laurel is gone, my men are gone, Ed is dead -- and you come to me, to help me.

Oh!!

God in Heaven, I can't refuse you now.

That would mock me too much!!

Can't let you go way from me again '' He closed his eyes, ashamed of his tears.

`` I'll go, Clay ''.

Clayton freed himself from the embrace and stepped back.

The eyes followed him fearfully.

`` The horses.

There isn't much time.

I'll saddle the horses and bring them round.

You get ready ''

He burst from the hot confinement of the room into the cold night air.

Gavin's stallion was in the barn and he tightened the cinches over the saddle blanket, working by touch in the darkness, comforting the animal with easy words.

When he had finished he led him and the mare to the porch.

The stallion had smelled the mare coming into heat and began to paw the turf, shaking his head.

Clayton looped the reins in a knot over the veranda post and patted the warm flesh of his neck.

The mare had backed away.

`` You take it easy, boy '', Clayton whispered.

`` She doesn't want you now.

You take it easy, your time will come ''.

Gavin stood on the porch, a thin figure.

He had taken a carbine down from the wall and it trailed from his hand, the stock bumping on the wood floor.

Clayton called to him and he came slowly down the steps.

`` Clay '', he said, `` where are we goin ''??

`` To a ranch in the valley.

There's someone there I have to see.

We may take her with us -- to California.

I don't know yet, it's crazy;;

I have to think about it.

But California is where we're goin ''.

`` California ''.

Gavin began to nod.

`` That's a new land.

A man could make a mark there.

Two men, together like us, we could do somethin fine out there, maybe find a place where no one's ever been.

Start out fresh, the two of us, like nothin had ever happened ''.

`` Yes, like a father and son ''.

`` I made you what you are '', Gavin whispered.

`` I made you so you could stand up.

I made you a man ''.

`` Yes, Gavin, you did ''.

He approached the horse and laid a hand on the stallion's quivering neck.

`` Help me up, Clay.

Help me up, I feel kind of stiff ''.

Clayton lifted him gently into the saddle, like a child.

`` I hate to leave my garden '', Gavin said.

`` They'll trample it down.

I loved my garden ''.

`` It will grow again -- in California ''.

`` I loved this valley '', he whispered huskily.

`` Lived alone here for three years, before any man came.

Lived alone by the river.

It was nice then, so peaceful and quiet.

There was no one but me.

I don't want to leave it ''.

Clayton swung into the saddle and whacked the stallion's rump.

The two horses broke from the yard, from the circle of light cast by the lamp still burning in the house, into the darkness.

Thirty-five

they rode at a measured pace through the valley.

Dawn would come soon and the night was at its coldest.

The moon had sunk below the black crest of the mountains and the land, seen through eyes that had grown accustomed to the absence of light, looked primeval, as if no man had ever trespassed before.

It looked as Gavin had first seen it years ago, on those nights when he slept alone by his campfire and waked suddenly to the hoot of an owl or the rustle of a blade of grass in the moon's wind -- a savage land, untenanted and brooding, too strong to be broken by the will of men.

Gavin sighed bitterly.

In that inert landscape the caravan of his desires passed before his mind.

He saw them ambushed, strewn in the postures of the broken and the dying.

In vain his mind groped to reassemble the bones of the relationships he had sought so desperately, but they would not come to life.

The silence oppressed him, made him bend low over the horse's neck as if to hide from a wind that had begun to blow far away and was twisting slowly through the darkness in its slow search.

They passed ranches that were framed dark gray against the black hills.

Then at last the darkness began to dissolve.

A bold line of violet broke loose from the high ridge of the mountains, followed by feathers of red that swept the last stars from the sky.

The wan light spread over the ground and the valley revealed in the first glimmer the contours of trees and fences and palely shadowed gullies.

They had been seen as soon as they left the ranch, picked out of the darkness by the weary though watchful eyes of two men posted a few hundred yards away in the windless shelter of the trees.

The two men whipped their horses into town and flung themselves up the steps of the saloon, crying their intelligence.

The men in Pettigrew's were tired from a night's drinking, their faces red and baggy.

But the liquor had flushed their courage.

They greeted the news angrily, as though they had been cheated of purpose.

Lester heard their muttering, saw their eyes reveal their desire.

He worked his tongue round and round in the hollow of his cheek and his voice came out of his throat, dry and cracked.

`` He's leavin.

That's what you wanted, isn't it??

Clayton is with him, takin him out of the valley.

You can't '' --

`` Keep out of this '', Purvis snarled.

`` He's not your brother, he's Gavin's son.

You see, he lied to us when he said he was leavin alone ''.

Joe Purvis was thinking back many years.

First he thought of the time he had ridden to Gavin and told him how his cattle were being rustled at the far end of the valley.

He remembered Gavin's smirk, his own cringing feeling, his impotence.

Then he thought of a time when Clayton's horse had fallen lame in the Gap.

His wife had said to him: `` Nellie is in love with Clayton Roy.

He wouldn't even dance with her at Gavin's party.

He treats her like she was dirt.

And you stand by like a fool and let him do it ''

He remembered Clayton's mocking smile in the saloon when he had asked him what he would do if they brought their cattle to water.

It was the night Clayton had tricked them in the poker game.

`` You're Gavin's son '', Joe Purvis had said.

He turned to Lester.

`` You brought him back to this valley thinkin he would help you find your boy.

He meant to help Gavin all the time.

He made a fool of you, Lester ''.

He swung round to the other men -- `` We can catch him easy!!

There are plenty of fresh horses halfway at my place.

If we let them go, they won't stay away, they'll find men to ride with them and they'll be back.

There's only one way they can get out now and that's through the Gap -- if we ride hard we can take them ''.

Lester's hand fluttered to Cabot's shoulder.

The boy jerked away.

`` He killed Tom -- do you understand that ''??

Cabot turned back to the men and he was drunk with the thing they would do, wild to break from the cloying warmth of the saloon into the cold of the ebbing night.

He fled through the door and down the steps, running, and the men grunted and followed, pushing Lester to one side where he backed against the wall with the sleeve of his jacket raised before his eyes to shut out the light.

Purvis and Silas Pettigrew were the last to leave.

They mounted up and rode slowly behind the others at a safe distance.

Thirty-six

in the cold dawn the mist swirled low to the ground, then rose with a gust of sudden wind to leave the valley clear.

The clouds parted and hard gashes of sunlight swooped down to stain the earth with streaks of white and gold light so that the shadows of the running horses flowed like dark streams over the dazzling snow.

When they turned in the saddle they could see the men behind them, strung out on the prairie in a flat black line.

The wind of their running was cold and wild, the horses were lathered and their manes streamed like stiff black pennants in the wind.

The mare began to tire and Clayton felt the spray of snow from the hoofs of Gavin's stallion.

He looked over his shoulder at the thin dotting of pursuers.

They neither gained nor fell back.

He rode low on the mare's neck.

Ahead of him Gavin turned slightly off the trail and pointed for the Gap, no more than a mile away.

Gavin's face was bloodless with excitement.

He did not look back;;

he could feel more than hear the staccato beat of hoofs that fanned out across the prairie to the north.

He knew who was riding after him -- the men he had known all his life, the men who had worked for him, sworn their loyalty to him.

Now they were riding to kill him.

And he was fleeing, running -- fleeing his death and his life at the same time.

The land over which he sped was the land he had created and lived in: his valley.

With every leaping stride of the horse beneath him he crossed one more patch of earth that had been his, that he would never see again.

The Gap looming before him -- the place where had confronted Jack English on that day so many years ago -- was his exit from all that had meaning to him.

California is too far, he thought.

He would never reach California.

He was too old -- when he passed up and through the corridor of pines that lined the trail he could see ahead, he was passing from life.

The sentry was not dead.

He was, in fact, showing signs of reviving.

He had been carrying an Enfield rifle and a holstered navy cap-and-ball pistol.

A bayonet hung in a belt scabbard.

He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic and hat.

Mike stripped these from him and donned them.

He and Dean tied and gagged the man, using his belt and shirt for the purpose.

They dragged him inside the building.

Fiske joined them, unsteady on his feet.

Julia, seeing the bandage, rushed to him.

`` You are hurt ''!!

She breathed.

`` I never felt better in my life '', Fiske blustered.

He turned to Susan and kissed her on the cheek.

`` Thank you, My dear '', he said.

`` You are very brave ''.

Mike silenced them.

`` We'll talk later.

First, we've got to get out of here ''.

`` We'll grab horses '', Dean said.

`` The main bunch is outside, but there are some over there inside the wall ''.

Mike debated it, trying to decide whether Fiske was strong enough to ride.

But it at least offered him a chance for living.

He had none here.

And, for the sake of Julia and Susan, it had to be tried.

The guerrilla bivouac remained silent.

Light showed in the orderly room across the parade ground.

Someone evidently was on duty there.

No doubt there would be men guarding the horses.

About a dozen animals were held inside the stockade, as best Mike could make out in the moonlight.

Evidently this was a precaution so that mounts would be available in an emergency.

He handed the guard's rifle to Fiske.

`` Dean and myself will try to cut out horses to ride '', he said.

`` We'll stampede the rest.

You stay with the ladies.

All of you be ready to ride hell for leather ''.

He added, `` If this doesn't work out, the three of you barricade yourself in the house and talk terms with them ''.

He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol.

Susan halted Dean and kissed him.

She clung to him, talking to him, and dabbing at her eyes.

Mike turned away.

He was thinking that the way she had responded to his own kiss hadn't meant what he had believed it had.

He felt unutterably weary.

Dean turned from Susan and took Julia Fortune in his arms.

He kissed her also, and with deep tenderness.

She too began to weep.

He released her and joined Mike.

`` All right '', he said.

Mike only said, `` Later ''.

`` Be careful, McLish ''!!

Susan said fiercely.

`` The way you were careful ''??

He snorted.

`` Running around in the moonlight almost naked and slugging a man with a rock ''??

He kept going.

He wanted no more sentimental scenes with her.

He might say or do something foolish.

Something all of them would regret.

He might tell her how sorry a spectacle she was making of herself, pretending to be blind to the way Julia Fortune had taken Dean's affections from her.

And using him, Mike McLish, as a sop to her pride.

He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol.

`` Stay well back of me '', he said.

`` I'm going to walk up to the horses, bold as brass, pretending I'm one of the guerrillas.

There's bound to be someone on guard, but the hat might fool them long enough for me to get close ''.

Holding the pistol concealed, he walked to the rear wall of the stockade.

It was pierced by a wagon gate built of two wings.

One wing stood open.

Mike passed through it and moved toward the dark mass of horses.

They were tethered, army style, on stable lines.

A voice spoke near-at-hand.

`` Who's that ''??

Just me '', Mike said.

`` Is that you, Bill ''??

He located his man.

The guard stood in the shadow of the stockade wall just out of reach of the moonlight.

Mike kept walking and got within arm's reach before the man became suspicious and straightened from his lax slouch.

Mike struck with the muzzle of the pistol.

But the luck that had been running their way left him.

The guard instinctively parried the blow with his rifle.

He tried to veer the rifle around to fire into Mike's body.

Mike, off balance, managed to bat the muzzle away a moment before it exploded.

The bullet went wide.

Mike swung the pistol in a savage backlash.

This time it connected solidly on the man's temple, felling him.

The explosion of the rifle had crashed against the walls of the stockade and the deep echoes were still rolling in the hills.

The startled horses began rearing on their tethers.

Dean came rushing up.

`` Are you hit ''??

He demanded.

`` No, but the fat's in the fire ''!!

Mike said.

`` There's no chance now of all of us getting away.

You'll have to try it alone ''.

The sentry's saddled horse stood picketed nearby, having been kept handy in case of need.

Mike took the bayonet from Dean's hand and slashed the picket line.

`` Up you go ''!!

He said.

`` Ride ''!!

Dean resisted Mike's attempt to push him toward the horse.

`` Why not you ''??

He protested.

`` Dammit ''!!

Mike said frantically.

`` You're lighter than me.

It's our only chance now.

Try to find these Feds.

The rest of us can fort up in the house and hang on until you get back.

You're the one that's taking the big chance ''.

Dean still hesitated, but Mike lifted him almost bodily into the saddle and thrust the reins in his hand.

`` No telling how good this horse is '', Mike panted.

`` Favor him and save something in case you hit trouble.

Watch out for Apaches when it comes daylight.

Take the pistol.

You might need it.

We'll still have the rifle, and I might be able to round up some more.

I'll stampede the rest of these horses so they can't chase you ''.

Dean leaned from the saddle and gave him a mighty whack on the back.

`` McLish '', he said as he kicked the horse into motion, `` I'd be a mighty sad man if we never met again ''.

Then he was on his way at a gallop.

Mike ran down the line, slashing picket ropes with the bayonet.

He lifted a screeching war whoop.

That touched off a total stampede.

He darted inside the stockade and freed the horses there.

These poured through the gate and joined the flight.

The animals thundered away into the moonlight, heading for the ridges.

The guerrillas were swarming from their bivouac at the west end of the enclosure.

`` Apaches ''!!

Mike yelled.

`` They're stealin' the stock ''!!

He scuttled in shadow along the east wall of the stockade and then followed the south wall until he was at the rear of the two frame buildings.

He crouched there.

His shout had been taken up and repeated.

The guerrillas were running across the parade ground and through the rear gate in the wake of the departing horses.

All were carrying guns they had seized up, but they were half-clad or hardly clad at all.

Durkin and Calhoun came running from the post.

They had pistols in their hands.

They bawled questions that were not answered in the uproar.

They followed the others toward the east gate.

Beyond the stockade rifles began to explode as some of the guerrillas fired at shadows that they imagined were Apaches.

Mike made a dash to the rear of the frame buildings.

He crawled beneath the two supply wagons which stood between the buildings and peered around a corner.

The area was deserted.

A man was standing in the open door of the lighted orderly room a few yards to Mike's left, but he, too, suddenly made up his mind and went racing to join the confused activity at the east end of the stockade.

Mike crawled to the door and peered in.

The orderly room seemed to be deserted.

A lantern hung from a peg, giving light.

Ducking inside, he found that three rifles were stacked in a corner.

A brace of pistols, holstered on belts, hung from a peg, along with ammunition pouches.

An ammunition case stood open, containing canisters which contained powder cartridges.

Mike seized a blanket from a pallet in a corner, spread it on the floor and used it to form a bag in which he placed his booty.

Shouldering the load he peered from the door.

His looting of the orderly room had taken only a minute or two and the vicinity was still clear of guerrillas.

He looked at the looming hoods of the supply wagons, struck by a new inspiration.

He set his bundle down.

Snatching the lantern from its peg, he shattered its globe with a blow against a post.

He picked up the powder canister and ran out.

Bursting paper cartridges, he scattered powder beneath the nearest wagon and dumped the contents of the canister upon it.

He shouldered the blanket again, backed off, and tossed the lantern with its open wick beneath the wagon.

He turned and raced across the parade ground toward the rock house.

Powder flame gushed beneath the wagon.

The stockade was brilliantly lighted and the guerrillas sighted him.

They realized the truth.

Bullets began to snap past him.

One struck the muzzle of one of the rifles that projected from the shoulder pack.

Its force spun him around, but he recovered and got into stride again.

A bullet tore the earth from beneath his foot when he was a stride or two from safety.

Another struck him heavily in the thigh and he went down.

Guerrillas were racing toward him.

Susan and Julia came from the door and dragged him with them.

The three of them floundered through the door into the interior and fell in a heap.

Susan bounced to her feet and slammed the door.

She crouched aside as bullets beat at the portal, chewing into the planks.

Some tore entirely through the whipsawed post oak.

The iron hinges held, but the planks were in danger of being torn from the crossbars.

Mike rolled to Susan, grasped her around the knees, dragging her off her feet.

He hovered over her to shield her, for spent bullets were thudding against the rear walls.

He peered from a loophole.

Guerrillas were only a dozen yards away, charging the house.

Mike snatched a pistol from the heap of scattered booty and fired.

He dropped a man with the first bullet.

At the same moment Wheeler Fiske fired the rifle Mike had given him and another guerrilla was hit.

That halted the rush.

The guerrillas scattered for cover.

The wagons were burning fiercely.

The mudwagon had caught fire also.

The blaze was spreading to the frame buildings.

The guerrillas realized they faced a new problem.

`` Gawdamighty ''!!

One screeched.

`` There goes our grub an' ammunition ''!!

`` Get a bucket line going ''!!

Calhoun shouted.

`` Hurry!!

Hurry ''!!

The guerrillas began a frantic search for pails in which to bring water from the spring.

But what few containers they found were inadequate.

Many of them, in increasing panic, came running with water in their hats in a ludicrous effort.

Both buildings were in flames.

The heat drove the guerrillas back.

The roof of the command post began to buckle.

`` Drag the wagons to the spring ''!!

Lew Durkin yelled.

`` Run 'em right into the spring!!

Hustle ''!!

One of the wagons erupted a massive pillar of flame.

A sizable supply of powder had been touched off.

The wagons and the coach were beyond saving and so were the buildings.

The glow of the fire reached through the openings in the windows, giving light enough to examine Mike's wound.

The bullet had torn through the flesh just above the knee, inflicting an ugly gash that was forming a pool of blood on the floor.

But it had missed the bone and had passed on through.

Susan and Julia ripped strips from their clothing and bound the injury.

Mike tested the leg and found that he was able to hobble around on it.

`` So it wasn't the earthquake that made him return to his village ''!!

`` No.

Now dammit, I don't want to go into any more explanations.

Here comes Jason.

Keep this to yourself ''.

Reverend Jason, looking worried, hurried toward us.

`` Anything wrong, cap'n??

The men seem to think so ''.

`` Dirion found a large war party south of us.

They'll probably attack at dawn '', Montero said.

He brushed past the clergyman and walked into the center of the camp.

Using his hands as a trumpet he shouted, `` Fort up!!

Fort up!!

There's a large war party on their way ''!!

For a second, engages, cooks, voyageurs appeared struck dumb.

Then Little Billy began shouting orders to round up the ponies and fill the water buckets and for the cooks to hurry up with the meal.

They all flew into action.

`` That was a terrible thing to do '', I said to Oso.

The Aricaras treated us like friends.

And here all the time you knew the Sioux would be using our rifles on them!!

God, what a world you people live in ''.

Oso gave me an unruffled look.

`` Old Knife's got the largest war party ever seen on the river '', he said calmly.

`` What would you have done in Montero's moccasins??

Let Old Knife come up and kill you and your people, or would you steer him on someone else ''??

He shook his head.

`` Mr. Manuel did that in the war.

That's why the British never got the tribes to fight for the King.

Mr. Manuel whispered in the ears of the Sioux that the Cheyennes were comin' to raid 'em for their horses.

Then he went on to the Cheyennes and told them that the Sioux was goin' to move up.

He did that with all the Nations.

Hell, they were fightin' each other so hard they had no time for anyone else.

The War Department wrote Mr. Manuel a letter and said he was a hero.

I saw that letter.

He carried it in a little wallet made of fish skin ''.

`` But that was war '', I said.

`` There's no war on now ''.

`` You're wrong, Matt.

In this country there's a war on every time the grass turns green.

First it was the Nations against themselves, then it was them against the whites.

And it's goin' to go on like this year after year until the white people take over this land ''.

I remember being told it would happen so fast people would think it took place overnight.

`` That's why this company's important.

Once we get over the mountains others will come along.

That's why the Trust don't want us to make it.

That bastard Chambers!!

-- Old Knife's not the only chief he'll get to do his dirty work!!

Before we get through he'll have the Blackfeet hankerin' for our hair and our goods.

Well, talkin' ain't goin' to help -- let's fort up ''!!

As I dug in behind one of the bales we were using as protection, I grudgingly found myself agreeing with Oso's logic, especially when I imagined what would have happened to Missy if Old Knife's large party of screeching warriors had overrun our company.

For, unlike the Sioux and the Crows, the Aricaras are not great horsemen, nor are they aggressive like the savage Blackfeet.

More of an agricultural nation, they have relied on their warriors only for defense and for survival in the endless wars of the plains.

Still, I was disgusted with myself for agreeing with Montero's methods.

Surprisingly, he had told the others what he had done.

In the brief moment I had to talk to them before I took my post on the ring of defenses, I indicated I was sickened by the methods men employed to live and trade on the river.

`` I think Montero did right '', Amy said firmly.

`` Let the savages kill each other.

What do we care ''??

Reverend Jason was understandably bitter.

`` It was a terrible thing to do.

Those little children.

''

But Oso replied calmly, `` Trouble ain't easy to dodge out in this country, rev'rend ''.

28.

Attack

Gray Eyes attacked our camp just as the first pink threads stitched together the hills and the sky.

Our camp was in the center of a wide valley.

Montero had set up a strong position, using every bale and box we had in addition to barricades of logs and brush.

He had ordered the ponies brought inside the fortified circle and had assigned Pierre and a band of picked engages the job of trying to keep them steady under fire.

The pony herd was the one flaw in our defense;;

the Rees undoubtedly would try to cut down as many of the animals as possible.

Wildly bucking horses would make the position difficult to defend against charging warriors.

The cooks had prepared one of the best meals we'd had in a long time, and on Montero's orders had baked enough bread to last the day.

Buckets were filled, the herd fed and watered.

The worst part had been the waiting;;

although we didn't expect the attack before dawn, the long cloudy night, filled with the sounds of the industrious insects, seemed endless.

Coyotes and hunting wolves sounded like signaling Indian scouts, the whinny of a restless pony made one's skin crawl.

Oso slept unconcernedly, his rifle cradled in his arms;;

I didn't catch a wink.

Every time I closed my eyes, I saw Gray Eyes rushing at me with a knife.

It was a relief when they finally came.

They poured through the opening in the valley, then spread out in a long line to come at us, brandishing their lances and filling the morning with their spine-chilling scalp cry.

`` Oso '', Montero called `` I'll get Gray Eyes ''.

`` That'll be a pleasure to see '', the big black murmured as he stared down the barrel of his rifle.

`` Hold your fire '', Montero was shouting.

`` Wait until my shot.

I'll shoot the first man who doesn't ''.

I could see them in my sights.

They were about a mile off;;

under me the ground quivered slightly.

At first they were only feathers and dark indistinguishable faces and bodies, hunched over their horses' heads.

Gradually they emerged as men.

Gray Eyes was in the lead.

His face was split by a vermilion streak, his eyes were pools of white;;

jagged red and black medicine symbols covered his chest.

He was naked except for a clout.

Next to him was a young boy I was sure had sat near me at one of the trading sessions.

His mouth was open, his neck corded with the strain of his screams.

I found his chest in my sights.

It had a red circle.

The circle came nearer and nearer.

My God, how long is he going to wait, I thought.

Montero's rifle cracked.

At first I thought he had missed.

Gray Eyes remained erect.

The feathered lance was still above his head.

As he started to slump over, another warrior swung him onto his horse.

I squeezed the trigger.

At the last second I dropped my sights from the bare chest and bright red circle to the chest of his pony.

I saw the pony fall like a stone and the young warrior flew over its head, bouncing like a rubber ball.

He started to run but Oso's shot caught him on the wing.

He jerked once in the grass and lay still.

`` If you're goin' to kill 'em --!!

Kill 'em ''!!

Oso growled.

What else he said was lost in the rattle of gunfire on all sides.

The Aricaras broke under the devastating fire, wheeled and retreated.

`` Lead up!!

Lead up!!

They'll be back ''!!

Montero was shouting.

Far up the valley I could see the Rees circling and reorganizing.

Out in front of our walls the grass was covered with dead and dying men, war shields, lances, blankets and wounded and dead horses.

The morning air was filled with the sweetish odor of new-spilled blood, the acrid stench of frightened horses, and the bitterness of burned powder.

A horse screamed as it twisted from side to side in a frenzy.

A rifle cracked;;

the square head fell over.

One of the warriors suddenly leaped to his feet and began running across the valley to the trees that lined the small creek.

His legs pumped furiously, his long black hair streamed out behind him.

There was a ragged volley.

He was dead before he hit the ground.

`` For Christ's sake, don't waste your powder on one of 'em ''!!

Montero shouted furiously.

`` Wait for the charge!!

The charge, I tell you ''!!

The sharp cries at the end of the valley were faint.

They grew louder as the Indians charged again.

I could see their faces glistening with sweat and bear grease, their mouths open, shouting their spine-chilling cries.

`` Gray Eyes is back,, Montero said.

The war captain had been badly wounded and was fighting to hold his seat.

I could see the blood running down his chest.

He was riding between two warriors, who held him erect when he started to slump.

I forgot to aim.

In my sights I watched him looming bigger and bigger.

Montero's shot had caught him high in the chest;;

there was no doubt he was dying.

Again we waited for Montero.

This time he delayed so long that some of the engages shouted frantically, but they held their fire.

The horses were only several lengths away when he fired.

The bullet flung Gray Eyes from his horse.

Our rolling volley swept most of the other riders from their mounts.

But a few reached our wall.

I heard the whir of an ax and a Canadian's face burst apart in a bloody spray.

I saw Little Billy rise and fire almost point blank and an Indian's face became shattered flesh and bone.

A second leaped from his horse to the top of the bale, firing four arrows in such rapid succession it didn't seem possible they were in flight.

Men screamed.

Oso reached up, jerked the buck from the bale and snapped his neck.

Other Indians were running at the ponies, shrilling and waving blankets.

Reverend Jason got one, the Canadians the others.

I saw the clergyman kneel for a moment by the twitching body of the man he had shot, then run back to his position.

The ponies were almost uncontrollable.

The pall of dust they raised made it difficult to see when the Aricaras charged again.

This time more of them hurdled the barrier.

A small Indian dived at Montero, who caught him with a swift upward stroke of his rifle butt.

It sounded like a man kicking a melon.

Above me a dark rider was whipping his pony with a quirt in an attempt to hurdle the bales.

Although my shot killed his horse, he rolled off the bale on top of me.

I could smell woodsmoke, grease, and oil.

His eyes were dark, fluid, fearful, and he gave a sigh as my knife went in.

Coming over the wall he had seemed like a hideous devil.

Now under me I could see him for what he really was, a boy dressed up in streaks of paint.

The Aricaras made one last desperate charge.

It was pitiful to see the thin ranks of warriors, old and young, wheeling and twisting their ponies frantically from side to side only to be tumbled bleeding from their saddles by the relentless slam, slam of the cruelly efficient Hawkinses.

Others, badly wounded, gripped hands in manes, knees in bellies, held on as long as possible and then, weak from ghastly wounds, slipped sideways, slowly, almost thoughtfully, to be broken under the slashing hoofs.

Some gracefully soared from the backs of their wounded, screaming mounts to make one last defiant charge before the lead split their hearts or tore their guts.

None of them reached our walls again.

The few survivors grudgingly turned away.

In the distance we could hear the drums and the wail of the death song.

She was carrying a quirt, and she started to raise it, then let it fall again and dangle from her wrist.

`` I saw your fire '', she said, speaking slowly, making an effort to control her anger.

`` You could burn down this whole mountainside with a fire that size.

It wouldn't matter to a fool like you.

It would to me ''.

`` All right '', Wilson said quickly.

`` The fire's too big.

And I appreciate the advice ''.

He was losing patience again.

An hour before, with the children asleep and nothing but the strange darkness, he would have appreciated company.

She had helped him change his mind.

`` I'm not advising you '', she said.

`` I'm telling you.

That fire's too big.

Let it burn down.

And make sure it's out when you leave in the morning ''.

He was taken aback.

It took him a long time to compose himself.

`` There's some mistake '', he said finally.

`` You're right about the fire.

It's bigger than it has to be, though I don't see where it's doing any harm.

But you're wrong about the rest of it.

I'm not leaving in the morning.

Why should I??

I own the place ''.

She showed her surprise by tightening the reins and moving the gelding around so that she could get a better look at his face.

It didn't seem to tell her anything.

She glanced around the clearing, taking in the wagon and the load of supplies and trappings scattered over the ground, the two kids, the whiteface bull that was chewing its cud just within the far reaches of the firelight.

She studied it for a long time.

Then she turned back to Wilson and smiled, and he wasn't quite sure what she meant by it.

`` You own this place ''??

She said, and her tone had softened until it was almost friendly.

`` You bought it ''??

`` From a man in St. Louis '', Wilson said.

`` Jake Carwood.

Maybe you know him ''.

The girl laughed.

`` I know him.

I ought to.

My father ran him off here six years ago ''.

Wilson didn't say anything.

He stood watching the girl, wondering what was coming next.

She had picked up the quirt and was twirling it around her wrist and smiling at him.

`` Carwood didn't tell you that '', she said.

`` No '', Wilson said.

`` But it's understandable.

It's not the kind of thing that a man would be proud of.

And it doesn't make any difference.

He sold me a clear title.

I have it with me, right here.

If you want to see '' --

`` Never mind '', she said sternly.

`` It wouldn't matter to my father, and not to me.

I meant what I said about that fire.

Be sure it's out when you leave.

That's all.

I'll let you go back to doing the dishes now ''.

It was meant to insult him, and didn't quite succeed.

He took the reins just below the bit and held them firmly, and it was his turn to smile now.

`` I don't mind washing dishes now and then '', he said pleasantly.

`` It doesn't hurt.

It might hurt you, though.

Somebody might mistake you for a woman ''.

He meant to say more, but he never got the chance.

She was quick.

She brought the quirt down, slashing it across his cheek, and he tried to step back.

She swung the quirt again, and this time he caught her wrist and pulled her out of the saddle.

She came down against him, and he tried to break her fall.

He grabbed her by the shoulders and went down on one knee, taking her weight so that some of the wind was driven out of him.

It made him a little sick, and he let go of her.

He got up slowly, and she was already on her feet, and he stood facing her.

He wiped the blood from his cheek.

`` I ought to '' -- he said.

He was shaking with anger, his breath coming in long, painful gasps.

`` That quirt -- I ought to use it on you, where it would do the most good.

If you were a man '' --

`` She isn't, mister ''.

The voice came from behind him, and Wilson turned.

The fire had gone down, and the man was only a shadow against the trees.

But a moment later he brought his horse forward into the light, and Wilson had a good look at him.

He was tall and dark-skinned, a half-breed, Wilson thought.

And he was handsome, despite the long thin scar that slanted across his cheek.

`` She's not a man, mister '', he said.

`` I am.

If you've got any ideas ''.

He raised the Winchester and pointed it at Wilson's chest.

`` Put the rifle down, Joseph '', the girl said.

She seemed irritated.

`` I thought I told you to stay home ''.

The half-breed eased the Winchester down and rested it across his lap.

The scar looked pure white in the half-darkness;;

his eyes were black and deep-set, and expressionless.

`` You shouldn't be riding up here after dark, Judith '', he said quietly.

`` I can take care of this.

It's no job for you ''.

The girl tapped the quirt impatiently against her knee and glared at him.

He took it without flinching.

`` I said go home, Joseph.

You've got no business up here ''.

The half-breed didn't answer this time.

But the scar seemed to pull hard at the corner of his mouth, and his eyes were hurt and angry.

It made Wilson wonder.

He watched the half-breed as he turned silently.

They could hear the pony's feet on the dry leaves for a while, then the sound faded out.

Wilson brushed the dust from his coat.

`` Who was that ''??

He asked.

`` Your personal guard??

You're pretty hard on him ''.

`` He works for my father '', the girl said, and then seemed to change her mind.

`` He's a friend.

His name's Joseph Sanchez.

Is there anything else you want to know ''??

`` Not now '', Wilson said.

`` I guess I'll find out soon enough.

You've got blood on your cheek.

Not yours.

Mine.

It must have got there when you fell against me ''.

She wiped it off with the sleeve of her coat.

`` I'll bet that's as close as you've been to a man since you were a baby '', Wilson said.

He saw her hand start to work down the leather thong toward the handle of the quirt, and he grabbed her wrist.

`` Oh, no '', he said, and he was without humor now.

`` I've had enough of that.

I've had enough of you.

I don't know what goes on around here, and I don't care.

I don't know what makes you think you can get away with this kind of business, and I don't care about that, either.

You took me by surprise.

But I'll know how to handle you next time ''.

She brought up her free hand to hit him, but this time he was quicker.

He side-stepped her blow and she fell, stumbling against the gelding.

She finally regained her balance and got up in the saddle.

Her hat had come off and fallen behind her shoulders, held by the string, and he could see her face more clearly than he had at any time before.

He had forgotten that she was so pretty.

But her prettiness was what he had noticed first, and all the other things had come afterward: cruelty, meanness, self-will.

He had known women like that, one woman in particular.

And one had been too many.

He watched the girl until she had gone into the trees, and waited until he couldn't hear the sound of her horse any longer, then went up to where the children were sleeping.

They weren't sleeping, of course, but they thought they were doing him a favor by pretending.

He hadn't shown up too well in their eyes, letting himself be browbeaten by a woman.

They expected greater things from him, regardless of how trying the circumstances, and they were disappointed.

And determined not to show it.

They lay a little too stiffly, with their eyes straining to stay closed.

`` Go to sleep '', he said.

`` Both of you.

There's better things to do than listen to something like that.

I'll be down at the creek finishing the dishes, if you want me ''.

He found the pan where he had dropped it and carried it back down to the stream.

The coyote was calling again, and he hoped that this time there would be no other sounds to interrupt it.

Not tonight, at any rate.

He had a feeling that the girl meant trouble.

If she did, he could stand it better in the light.

He scrubbed absent-mindedly at the pans and reflected on how things had turned out.

That afternoon when they had pulled up in front of the broken-down ranch house, his hopes had been high.

Already some of the pain had gone from Amelia's death.

Not all of it.

There would still be plenty of moments of regret and sadness and guilty relief.

But they were starting a new life.

And they had almost everything they needed: land, a house, two whiteface bulls, three horses.

The land wasn't all Wilson had expected of it.

Six hundred and forty acres, the old man back in St. Louis had said;;

good grass, good water.

Well, the grass was there, though in some places the ground was too steep for a cow to get to it.

The water was there, so much of it that it spread all through the dead orchard.

And there was a house;;

livable perhaps, but badly in need of repairs.

In the last analysis, though, Wilson had little cause to complain.

The place had been cheap -- just the little he had left after Amelia's burial -- and it would serve its purpose.

There was only one place where Jake Carwood's description had gone badly awry: the peace and quiet.

It hadn't started out that way.

And he had a feeling -- thanks to the girl -- that things would get worse before they got better.

2

They had the house cleaned up by noon, and Wilson sent the boy out to the meadow to bring in the horses.

He stood on the porch and watched him struggling with the heavy harness, and finally went over to help him.

Kathy was already in the wagon.

They were going to town, and they were both excited.

Wilson backed the team into the traces, and wished they weren't going to town at all.

He had an uneasy feeling about it.

That girl last night, what was her name??

Judith Pierce.

It was the only thing about her that was the least bit hard to remember.

He finished with the team and filled his pipe and stood looking about him.

He had spent two hours riding around the ranch that morning, and in broad daylight it was even less inviting than Judith Pierce had made it seem.

There was brush, and stands of pine that no grass could grow under, and places so steep that cattle wouldn't stop to graze.

But there was water.

There was an artificial lake just out of sight in the first stand of trees, fed by a half dozen springs that popped out of the ground above the hillside orchard.

Yes, there was plenty of water, too much, and that was probably the trouble.

There were tracks of cattle all over his six hundred and forty acres.

The first part of the road was steep, but it leveled off after the second bend and curled gradually into the valley.

It was hotter once they reached the flat, and drier, but the grass was better.

A warm breeze played across it, moving it like waves.

A red-tailed hawk flew in behind them and stayed there, watching for any snakes or rabbits that they might stir up from the side of the road.

It took them an hour before they came to the first houses of Kelseyville.

The town was about what Wilson expected: one main street with its rows of false-fronted buildings, a water tower, a few warehouses, a single hotel;;

all dusty and sunbaked.

The place was quiet.

Such was my state of mind that I did not question the possibility of this;;

under the circumstances I was only too willing to confess all.

I was nearly thirty at the time.

I went to the hall in the afternoons only, on these preliminary matters.

It was dark and, I sensed, very large;;

only the counter at one end was lighted by a long fluorescent tube suspended directly above it.

Sometimes I was aware of people moving about in the darkness.

I would turn away from my writing in the hope of getting a good look at them but I never quite succeeded.

A glimpse of three of four vague figures, at the most.

Drifting here and there.

Squatting, as if waiting.

The pulsing glow of a cigarette.

Since they could see me but I not them, their presence in the hall disturbed me.

The clerk paid them no attention.

This impressed me, until I realized how limited was his sphere of influence.

His job simply consisted in registering new men.

When the phone rang he answered it.

His authority extended to the far edge of the counter, no further.

None of the men hanging around the hall bothered to speak to him.

Baldness was attacking his pate.

He spoke to me in a gruff voice, an affectation which quite belied his personality.

He wore his white shirt open at the neck, revealing a bit of scrawny pale chest underneath.

It was obvious that he wished himself different from the sort of person he thought he was.

But it was not easy for him and he often slipped.

When one of the men in the hall behind us spat on the floor and scraped his boot over the gob of spittle I noticed how the clerk winced.

I felt certain he was really a spineless little man.

His hat( the cause of his baldness??

) hung on a hook on the wall, and underneath it I could see his tie, knotted, ready to be slipped over his head, a black badge of frayed respectability that ought never to have left his neck.

The morning's tabloids were on the counter, and a stack of dog-eared men's magazines.

On a shelf in the office behind the counter was a small radio dialed permanently on a station which broadcast only vulgar commercials and cheap popular music.

Everything about the clerk was trivial.

Once, pressing him, I learned that his job was only part-time, in the afternoons when nothing went on in the hall.

Noticing my disappointment he attempted to salvage what scraps and shreds of authority he felt might still be clinging to his person.

With distaste I saw him assume a pompous air.

When he saw me coming he turned his radio off.

He made a show of rearranging my forms on the shelf.

He would pick up the ringing phone with studied negligence, then bark into it with gruff importance.

What limited knowledge he possessed he forced upon me.

In the mornings, I was informed, fluorescent tubes, similar to the one above the counter, illuminated the entire hall.

They, and the two large fans which I could dimly see as daylight filtered through their vents, down at the far end of the hall, could be turned on by a master switch situated inside the office.

He pointed out the switch to me and for a moment I foolishly believed that he would let deed follow words.

I was shown, instead, a batch of white tickets of the sort handed out, he told me, every morning.

Now, here was something of obvious importance to me, yet when I reached for the tickets he snatched them away from my hand.

He couldn't afford to have anyone mess around with them, he said.

Each of those tickets was of great value to its rightful recipient.

I withdrew my hand.

Later I would remember what this pompous little man had told me about the worth of a ticket.

Having nothing else to do except wait for my forms to be processed, I gave myself over to speculations concerning the hall itself.

When suitably lighted, what would it look like??

The presence of the two exhaust fans seemed to indicate that the hall could become crowded for air.

One afternoon, upon receiving permission and the necessary instructions from the clerk, I had visited the toilet adjoining the hall.

By counting the number of stalls and urinals I attempted to form a loose estimate of how many men the hall would hold at one time.

For although I had crossed a corner of the hall on my way to the toilet I still could not tell for sure how far to the rear the darkness extended.

I could observe the two fans down at the end, but their size in themselves meant nothing to me as long as I had no measure of comparison.

I had for some time been hoping, in vain, for one of the dim figures to pass between the fan vents and myself.

I knew that three or four of them were almost always present in the hall, but what they were doing, and exactly where, I could not tell.

It was, I felt, possible that they were men who, having received no tickets for that day, had remained in the hall, to sleep perhaps, in the corners farthest removed from the counter with its overhead light.

This light did not penetrate very far back into the hall, and my eyes were hindered rather than aided by the dim daylight entering through the fan vents when I tried to pick out whatever might be lying, or squatting, on the floor below.

Also the clerk appeared to disapprove of my frequent curious glances back over my shoulder.

No sooner would I turn my head away from the counter before he would address me, at times quite sharply, in order to bring back my attention.

And I had hardly finished my business in the toilet on the aforementioned occasion when the lights in that place, like the hall lights controlled from the switch in the office, flicked off and on impatiently.

This sort of petty vigilance annoyed me.

I felt certain it was self-appointed.

It sprang from a type of mentality I'd encountered often enough but certainly had not expected to find here.

I decided to see no more of the clerk until the processing of my papers was completed.

I felt strongly attached to the hall, however, and hardly a day passed when I did not go to look at it from a distance.

I lived in a state of suspense because of it.

I could not cling to my past nor did I wish to.

I had signed it off on the forms.

My future lay solely with the hall, yet what did I know about the hall at this point??

Although I had been inside it I had not yet seen it functioning.

I wished to prepare myself but did not even know what sort of clothes I ought to be wearing.

I did not despair, however;;

far from it!!

I was constantly searching for clues around the neighborhood of the hall.

Though only a relatively short walk separated it from my own part of town, its character was wholly foreign to me.

Large warehouses flanked the street on which the hall fronted.

The river was only a few blocks away but an unbroken line of piers prevented me from seeing it.

Sometimes I noticed the tops of ships' masts and funnels reaching above the pier roofs.

The sounds issuing from beyond -- winches whirring, men shouting -- indicated great activity and excited me.

The hall, on the other hand, appeared lifeless and deserted on these long waterfront afternoons.

It resembled nothing I'd ever seen before.

Its front was windowless, but irregularities in the masonry might be an indication that windows, now blinded, had once looked out upon the street.

I kept circling the block hoping to see, from the street behind it, the rear of the hall.

But it was not a tall structure and other buildings concealed it.

For weeks I wandered about this neighborhood of warehouses and garages, truck terminals and taxi repair shops, gasoline pumps and longshoremen's lunch counters, yet never did I cease to feel myself a stranger there.

I returned to the hall, despite my dislike for the clerk.

As I had expected, he insisted that my visits to the hall would do nothing to further the process of my application.

Meanwhile spring had passed well into summer.

At last, when I put it to him directly, the clerk was forced to admit that the delay in my case was unusual.

When I asked him what, if anything, I could do about it, he surprised me by referring me to the director of the hall.

I could consult this personage on any weekday morning, though not before ten o'clock.

The clerk impressed this upon me: that I should not arrive in the hall before ten o'clock.

When I went for my interview with the director I saw why.

Although it was dark as usual I could see that the hall had only recently contained a great many people.

Cigarette butts littered the floor.

The big fans were going, drawing from the large room the remnants of stale smoke which drifted about in pale strata underneath the ceiling.

I had felt the draft they were making while mounting the stairs.

The staircase itself seemed still to be echoing the heavy footfalls of many men.

I stopped by the counter.

No one was behind it, but in the rear wall of the office I noticed, for the first time, a door which had been left partially open.

Past it I could see part part of a desk, a flag in a corner, a rug on the floor.

The director's office.

I rapped my knuckles on the counter.

The director came to the door.

I was at once disappointed, although just what I had expected him to look like I could not have explained.

He was a man in his late forties, with graying hair, of medium height;;

he looked dapper in a lightweight summer suit, brown silk tie and green-tinted soft collar.

He wore perforated, white-topped shoes;;

they somehow made me expect to see him launch into a vaudeville tapdance routine any moment.

But he came toward me sedately enough, showed me around the counter, offered me a seat inside his office, then walked to a file cabinet and got out my application.

I had the impression that he had read my forms, perhaps several times.

He did not look at them now.

As he lowered himself on the chair behind his desk I wondered what this dapper, slightly ridiculous man could possibly have to do with the workings of the hall.

He spoke, in a voice as immaculate as his appearance.

Why had I registered??

Begging my pardon, he must express his astonishment over seeing a person of my background applying at the hall.

He had looked over my forms and was impressed by what he had seen there;;

indeed, my scholastic qualifications were such that he, a college graduate himself, must envy me them.

Was I sure, he asked, that I knew what I was applying for??

What sort of men I would come into contact with, at the hall??

These questions did not surprise me;;

I felt certain that the director, like the afternoon clerk, seldom moved beyond the counter, that the hall, to them, was a jungle, a dark and unwelcome place.

Though I doubted that he would understand me, I told the director my motives for applying.

I had always, I said, hankered after working hard with my hands.

This desire, I went on, growing voluble as my conviction was aroused, had mounted at such a rate recently that I now found its realization necessary not only to my physical but also to my spiritual wellbeing.

To this effect I had already severed all connections which bound me to my former existence.

The flat, hard cap was small, but he thrust it to the back of his head.

`` Tie him up ''.

`` Hell with it ''.

Before they could guess his intention Rankin stepped forward and swung the guard's own gun against the uncovered head, hard.

The man went over without sound, falling to the bare floor.

Barton said harshly, `` Why did you do that ''??

Rankin sneered at him.

`` What did you want me to do, kiss him??

He dumped me in solitary twice ''.

Barton caught the lighter man's shoulder and swung him around.

`` Let's get one thing straight, you and me.

The only reason we brought you was to get Miller out.

If you ever try anything without my orders I'll kill you ''.

Fred Rankin looked at him.

It seemed to Barton that the green eyes mocked him, the thin-lipped smile held insolence, but he had no time to waste now.

`` Come on.

Let's move ''.

They filed out through the guard-room door, into the paved square.

There were three other men within this prison whom Barton would have liked to liberate, but they were in other cell blocks.

There was no chance.

They moved slowly, toward the main gate, following the wall.

There was no moon.

They had chosen this night purposely.

They reached the guard house without alerting the men on the walls above, and Powers slipped through the door.

Two men were on duty inside, playing pinochle, relaxed.

They looked up in surprise as Powers came in.

`` What are you doing out of the block ''??

`` It's Curtiss '', he said, naming the man Rankin had hit.

`` I've got to have help ''.

They stared at him.

The sergeant in charge climbed to his feet.

`` What's wrong with him ''??

`` He's having some kind of a fit ''.

The sergeant turned to the door.

As he passed through it Barton shoved his gun against the man's side.

`` One sound and you're dead ''.

The sergeant froze.

Powers had not followed.

Powers was covering the remaining guard.

The man half-reached for the cord of the alarm bell.

Powers knocked his arm aside.

Deliberately, with none of Rankin's viciousness, he laid the barrel of his gun alongside the guard's head.

They were free.

Even Barton could not quite believe it.

It had gone without a hitch.

They slid through the wicket in the big gate, ghosted across the dark ground.

Five minutes later they reached the horses.

Barton was relieved to see that Carl Dill and Emmett Foster had brought extra mounts.

He had been worried that with Miller and Rankin added to the escape party they would be short.

No one hurried.

They walked the horses, heading along the river, Barton and Emmett Foster in the lead, seven men riding quietly through the night.

The only thing which would have attracted attention was that two wore the uniform of prison guards, three the striped suits of convicts.

Five miles.

In a small grove against the river they halted, turning deep into the protection of the trees.

Foster had brought extra clothing also.

A good man, Emmett.

He had been one of the original Night Riders, one who had escaped the trial.

It was to him that Barton had sent Carl Dill on Dill's release from the prison.

Clyde Miller was crying softly to himself, shedding his striped suit and fumbling into the nondescript butternut pants, the worn brown shirt.

Kid Boyd was unusually silent, Rankin watchful, a few paces apart.

Barton finished his dressing and extended his hand to Powers.

`` I won't even try to thank you ''.

The ex-prison guard was embarrassed.

He said in a studied voice, `` I didn't do it for you.

I did it for the valley.

You're the only man the Night Riders will follow.

We've been starving and I don't like to starve ''.

Barton turned away, his eyes falling upon Rankin beside his horse.

`` Good luck ''.

The murderer lifted his head.

`` Meaning you want me to ride out ''??

`` You aren't one of us.

There's nothing for you here ''.

`` I got no place to go ''.

Barton hesitated.

He did not trust Rankin, his violent temper, his killer instinct.

But ten years in prison had taught him realities.

They were in a fight, outweighed in both numbers and money.

It was all right to put a bunch of ranchers onto horses, to call them Night Riders, to set out to attack the largest mining combination the country had ever seen if all they wanted was adventure.

But if they really hoped to succeed they needed professionals, men who knew how to use a gun against men, who would match the killers on the other side.

`` Your choice '', he said briefly, and turned to Kid Boyd.

`` Bury those uniforms so they won't be found ''.

Then Barton touched Carl Dill's arm and moved off, up the river bank.

He wanted a careful, uninterrupted report from Dill on the conditions in the valley.

They squatted on their heels in the deep mud and Dill found a cigar in his breast pocket, passing it over silently.

He too knew the agony of going for weeks, sometimes months without the solace of tobacco.

Mitchell Barton drew in the fragrance deeply, letting the smoke lie warm and soothing in his throat for a moment before he exhaled.

Through the gloom he could not see the man beside him clearly but he knew him thoroughly.

For his first five years in prison, they had shared a cell.

Carl Dill was neither a rancher nor a valley man.

He had been the auditor for the mining syndicate, and he had stolen fifty thousand dollars of the syndicate's money.

He had done time for the theft.

The one thing they had in common was their hatred.

Both hated Donald Kruger.

It had drawn them together, and since his release from prison Dill had worked tirelessly to effect this night's escape.

He said now, `` I've got the perfect headquarters set up.

The old Haskell mine ''.

Mitch Barton knew the place.

Twenty years before a group of Easterners had bought out the Haskell claims in the rocky hills south of Grass Valley.

They had spent a million dollars, carving in a road, putting up buildings, drilling their haulage tunnel.

Then the vein had petered out and the whole project had been abandoned.

`` The road's washed badly '', said Dill, `` but there's a trail you can get over with a horse.

A company of cavalry couldn't come in there if two men were guarding that trail ''.

Barton nodded.

`` How do the valley people feel ''??

`` As mad as ever.

But Kruger's men keep them off balance, and they don't trust me.

I'm an outsider.

When they learn you're in the hills though, they'll rally, don't worry about that ''.

Barton waited for a long moment, then asked the question which lay always uppermost in his mind.

`` My boy.

Did you find him ''??

Dill was silent as if he hated to answer, and Barton had a cold, sick feeling of apprehension.

`` He's in Morgan's Ferry ''.

Barton half-straightened in surprise.

`` What's he doing there ''??

Again Dill hesitated.

`` Dealing faro ''.

`` Dealing faro??

How come ''??

`` Your sister-in-law has the faro bank in Cap Ayres' saloon ''.

Barton cursed under his breath.

After another long pause he asked, `` How many people know who they are ''??

`` Everyone.

Your cousin Finley saw to that.

He's quite a rat, you know.

He sold out to Kruger's men.

He's informed them of everything you've ever written him.

He wants your ranch ''.

Barton stood up.

He said tensely, `` All right.

Let's go get the boy ''.

Dill had come up also.

`` I was afraid of this.

I almost didn't tell you ''.

`` If you hadn't I'd have killed you ''.

Dill's voice tightened.

`` But you can't ride into the Ferry.

That's what they'll expect you to do.

They'll be there waiting for you.

I understand how you feel about the child.

''

`` The hell you do ''.

Barton's voice was rougher than Dill had ever heard it.

`` I never saw him.

My wife died in childbirth after I was sent away.

`` I can't leave him there.

Donald Kruger would like nothing better than to hold him as hostage, and I wouldn't entrust a snake to his tender care.

I've got to get the boy.

Let's ride ''.

Chapter two

Barton's men cut the telegraph wires in half a dozen places, carrying away whole sections to make repairs more difficult.

It was over an hour before their escape was discovered, but still the news that Barton was free flashed across the central portion of the state.

It reached Donald Kruger in his massive home in Burlingame.

It reached the mines at North San Juan and Bloomfield.

It brought men out of bed and sent them into hurried conferences.

For everyone involved knew that the whole valley was a powder keg, and Mitchell Barton the fuse which could send it into explosive violence.

Creighton Hague sat in his office above the Ione pit.

The office was of logs, four rooms, each heated by an iron stove.

The building was dwarfed by the scene outside.

There a dozen giant monitors played their seventy-five-foot jets of water against the huge seam of tertiary gravel which was the mountainside.

The gravel was the bed of an ancient river, buckled in some prehistoric upheaval of earth.

It was partially cemented by ages and pressure, yet it crumpled before the onslaught of the powerful streams, the force of a thousand fire hoses, and with the gold it held washed down through the long sluices.

A million dollars' of gold a month.

A million tons of rock and soil and brush.

The monitors ran twenty-four hours each day.

Their roar, like the swelling volume of a hundred tornadoes could be heard for miles.

Hague, like all who worked near the pits, was partly deafened from the constant assault against his eardrums.

He was a big man, wearing a neat flannel shirt against the cold foothill air.

Fat showed in loose rolls beneath the shirt.

Ten years older than Mitch Barton, he had clawed his way up from mucker in the pits to manager of the operation.

He was proud of his accomplishments, proud of his job, proud that Donald Kruger and his associates trusted him.

He lived and breathed for the mining company.

No man could have reached his spot nor held it without being ruthless, and Hague had made a virtue of ruthlessness all of his life.

There came a ghost of noise at the office door and Hague swung to see Kodyke in the entrance from the outer room.

Hague had never accustomed himself to Kodyke.

The man was tall, thin, with a narrow face and a too-large nose.

The eyes always held Hague, eyes of a dead man, lidless as a lizard's, with the fixed intensity of a cobra.

Even Hague was repelled by the machinelike deadliness that was Kodyke.

He knew nothing about the man's history.

Kodyke had appeared at the mine one day bearing a letter from Kruger.

Kodyke was to head the dread company police.

He ran the change rooms.

He threw out the hi-graders.

He supervised the cleanups and handled the shipments of raw gold which each week went out to San Francisco.

Hague squeezed down his uneasy dislike.

He pulled open the top drawer of his desk and drew out a tintype.

`` This is Mitchell Barton.

He broke out of Folsom last night.

Apparently he bribed one of the guards.

We want him back there or we want him dead ''.

Kodyke took the picture in a lean hand, studying it thoughtfully.

`` Dangerous ''??

`` Dangerous, yes.

You know how the ranchers in the valley are.

They blame us for all their troubles.

Ten years ago they blew up some of our ditches.

It cost us a hundred thousand dollars and thirty days lost time to fix them.

We don't want Barton's Night Riders loose again ''.

The gunman nodded, slipping the picture into his breast pocket, saying nothing.

Normally Hague wasted no words, but now he found himself unable to stop their flow although he knew Kodyke was aware of all he said.

If she sensed any unusual preoccupation on the part of her mother, she did not comment upon it.

After they had finished eating, Melissa took Sprite the kitten under her arm -- `` so that Auntie Grace can teach it about the whistle '' -- and climbed into the station wagon beside her mother.

She had offered to walk, but Pamela knew she would not feel comfortable about her child until she had personally confided her to the care of the little pink woman who chose to be called `` Auntie ''.

When they reached their neighbor's house, Pamela said a few polite words to Grace and kissed Melissa lightly on the forehead, the impulse prompted by a stray thought -- of the type to which she was frequently subject these days -- that they might never see one another again.

Then she turned the station wagon around and headed it back down the hill, with the village as her ostensible destination.

As she drove, she thought about her plan.

It was really quite simple.

So simple, in fact, that it might even work -- although Pamela, now, in her new frame of mind, was careful not to pretend too much assurance.

That mistake, she thought, had cost her dearly these past few days, and she wanted to avoid falling into any more of the traps that the mountain might set for her.

She must be cautious so as not to alert the scheming forest.

When the station wagon drew abreast of the dusty dirt road that led up to the porch of the Culver house, Pamela turned the wheel, guiding the car to its familiar parking spot close to the house, and stopped.

All of her movements were careful and methodical, partaking of the stealth of a criminal who has plotted his felony for months in advance and knows exactly which step to take next in the course of the final execution of his crime.

She locked the ignition, removed the keys, stepped out of the car and went into the house.

Here, she dropped the keys on a small table beside the door and went upstairs to her bedroom.

On her bureau lay a small, brass ornament of simple design and faded engraving -- an object which, Pamela believed now, had been the property of her great-grandfather, Major Hiram Munroe Culver.

He had belonged to this land and, perhaps, had desecrated it -- and this was the only material symbol that remained of him.

If she, Pamela, were being held responsible for his crimes, then hers must be the final act of expiation.

She would return this symbol to the mountain, as one pours seed back into the soil every Spring or as ancient fertility cults demand annual human sacrifice.

Slowly and thoughtfully, she slipped the ornament into the pocket of her slacks, moved down the stairs and out of the house.

There was only one place where the mountain might receive her -- that unnamed, unnameable pool harbored in its secret bosom.

Atonement, if atonement were possible, could only be made at that sacred, sacrificial basin.

It was there that she would have to enact her renunciation, beg forgiveness.

Perhaps it was insane, Pamela thought.

Perhaps it was all a vividly conceived dream.

But she was caught in it, and she faced the terrible possibility that, if it were a dream, it was one from which she might never awaken.

Facing the forest now, she who had not dared to enter it before, walked between two trees at random and headed in what she believed was the direction of the pool.

She remembered little of her previous journey there with Grace, and she could but hope that her dedication to her mission would enable her to accomplish it.

The forest was open and freely welcoming, extending an enchanted hand.

The ground was covered with soft pine needles and the slope was gentle.

Birds chirped and chattered in the trees and the sun, all dewy-eyed and soft, caressed her shoulders warmly from time to time.

It was not, thought Pamela, such an evil place after all.

No wonder Melissa responded so completely to its beckoning.

Perhaps she had no reason to fear these trees that whispered their secrets above her head as she passed.

Was it not possible, after all, that the forest was in league with her and her child that its sympathy lay with the Culvers that she had erred in failing to understand this??

Pamela felt calm and peaceful as she walked along.

The slight flutter that had disturbed the motion of her heart when she entered the forest was gone now, and even the dim groves of trees through which she occasionally passed did not reawaken her fear.

She regarded them as signs that she was nearing the glen she sought, and she was glad to at last be doing something positive in her unenunciated, undefined struggle with the mountain and its darkling inhabitants.

Having persisted too long in deliberate ignorance and denial of the forces that threatened her, Pamela was relieved now to admit their potency and to be taking definite steps toward grappling with them.

A few days ago, she would have thought such an expedition as this utterly ridiculous;;

today, on the contrary, it seemed utterly reasonable.

She did not pause to consider what she would do if her plan should fail;;

she directed all of her mental and physical energy toward achieving this one goal.

If, as she walked, her steps fumbled from time to time, she chose to ignore that omen.

If the slope grew steeper and the groves more dim, she tried not to heed.

Success depended upon maintaining her equanimity;;

she must be poised and proud and unafraid in order to prove to the mountain that she was in earnest.

The forest took on an impersonal aspect.

It did not care what sort of person prowled its woods, plucked at its bark or stripped the berries from its bushes.

Unconcerned, indifferent, unmotivated, the forest was simply there -- fighting man's depredations with more abundant growth and man's follies with its own musical evening laughter.

Red man or white man, pacifist or killer, the forest would accept them all -- knowing that it could thrive equally well on slaughter and beneficence;;

knowing that its ageless mass would always dwarf the short span of time allotted to any man.

Pamela shook her head.

She must not think about time.

That was another one of those traps.

In her grim pursuit of tranquillity, Pamela focused her thoughts on her husband.

If, when this was all over, she found the words to tell him about it, she wondered if he would ever understand.

How could he comprehend her need when he himself was innocent??

Indian ghosts would not impinge upon his nights, nor would his days be haunted by the dimly-outlined, ill-conceived figure of her benighted ancestor.

His bright, daylight mind would whistle away such images;;

they would not dare to face his scoffing.

Pamela was glad Jim was nowhere near.

His presence would have interfered with her duty.

The mountainside grew steeper and she slipped once or twice on the smooth pine needles.

The trees huddled more closely together, their limbs and leaves intertwined in a coarse curtain against the sun.

Bushes and vines abetted the rocks in forming thorny detours for the struggling stranger, and without the direct light of the sun to act as compass, Pamela could no longer be positive of her direction.

Nevertheless, she continued to move upward.

She was sure she would reach the pool by climbing, and she clung to that belief despite the increasing number of obstacles.

The forest had become an alien world where she strove, alone, unprotected, unguided, to deal with whatever hindrances were offered.

It was a bold, dark castle of pine boughs that stood like a medieval fortress, eclipsing the sun and human time.

At one and the same time, she was within it but still searching for the drawbridge that would give her entry.

Silence came into the forest -- a solid being that clapped its hand over the murmuring mouths of the birds and the whispered comfort of the trees.

Silence walked at Pamela's side, its presence numbingly close, yet too far for her to hear.

Silence stood in front of her, waiting, and in back of her, blocking her retreat.

She stumbled over the root of a tree that protruded maliciously above the earth.

In spite of her attempt to preserve her balance, she fell, bruising her arm on a naked stone.

For a moment, she could not catch her breath and then, her breath returning in short, frightened spasms, she lifted herself to her feet laboriously.

She started to brush the dirt and bits of leaves off her clothes.

Her arm bled slightly, and the offended skin cried out in pain.

She looked around.

She was bewildered.

She seemed to have come such a long distance -- too far for her destination which had wilfully been swallowed up in the greedy gloom of the trees.

She stood quite still, trying to focus upon a direction in which to turn, a path to follow, a clue to guide her.

She was standing in a thick grove.

The trees were crowded so closely together that their branches overlapped, virtually shutting out the sun completely.

The earth smelled moist and pungent as it might in a cave deprived of the cleansing effect of the sun's rays.

She had the feeling that, under the mouldering leaves, there would be the bodies of dead animals, quietly decaying and giving their soil back to the mountain.

The thought made Pamela shudder.

A terrible chill swept through the grove.

Not a breeze exactly, but a pocket of icy air that settled with a loathsome familiarity upon the deep confines of the grove, catching Pamela in a leering embrace.

There was a peculiar density about it, a thick substance that could be sensed but never identified, never actually perceived.

Where before had she felt or dreamt or imagined such a scene??

She already knew this unwholesome, chilling atmosphere that was somehow grotesquely alive.

It enclosed her clammy hands and twined around her ankles.

It crept into the open neck of her blouse and slid down her body, seeping into her flesh through all the quivering pores of her skin.

It crawled across her breasts, suffocating the life in her nipples.

It circled her thighs, exploring with its icy tentacles.

It entered her body with the ghastly intimacy of an incubus, and its particles, spreading, creeping, crawling, joined themselves into steel bands that constricted her knees so tightly that they ached;;

stifled her lungs so that her breath came in harsh gasps;;

clutched her throat and sucked up the moisture in her mouth so that her tongue was dry and hard and stuck to the roof of her mouth and her teeth were clenched together in the rigid fixture of her jaws.

She had to get away from here before this demoniac possession swallowed up the liquid of her eyes and sank into the fibers of her brain, depriving her of reason and sight.

But she did not know which way to go.

The shadows of the trees engulfed her, foreclosing every possible exit from the grove.

She had been snared here by a vile sensuality that writhed around her throat in ever-tightening circles.

She could not scream, for even if a sound could take shape within her parched mouth, who would hear, who would listen??

Does the mountain listen??

Pamela groped blindly.

She had to escape.

She had to move in some direction -- any direction that would take her away from this evil place.

She thrust forward through the shadows and the trees that resisted her and tried to fling her back.

Her own body protested, aching painfully where the blood in her veins had congealed, where cold demon wisps still clung and caressed.

Every movement she made seemed unnecessarily noisy.

Twigs cracked loudly under her feet;;

bushes swished and scratched at her slacks;;

tree branches snapped as she pushed them ruthlessly away from her.

Miraculously, she found exactly the right statement.

She began it deliberately, so that none of her words would be lost on him.

`` I want to tell you something Thomas DeMontez Lord.

I'm well aware that you've got a pedigree as long as my leg, and that I don't amount to anything.

But '' --

`` But it don't matter a-tall '', Lord supplied fondly.

`` To me you'll always be the girl o' my dreams, an' the sweetest flower that grows ''.

Beaming idiotically, he pooched out his lips and attempted to kiss her.

She yanked away from him furiously.

`` You shut up!!

Shu-tt up-pp!!

I've got something to say to you, and by God you're going to listen.

Do you hear me??

You're going to listen ''!!

Lord nodded agreeably.

He said he wanted very much to listen.

He knew that anything a brainy little lady like her had to say would be plumb important, as well as pleasin' to the ear, and he didn't want to miss a word of it.

So would she mind speaking a little louder??

`` I think you stink, Tom Lord!!

I think you're mean and hateful and stupid, and -- louder ''??

Said Joyce.

`` Uh-huh.

So I can hear you while I'm checkin' the car.

Looks like we might be in for a speck of trouble ''.

He opened the door and got out.

He waited at the car side for a moment, looking down at her expectantly.

`` Well??

Wasn't you goin' to say somethin' ''??

Then, helpfully, as she merely stared at him in weary silence, `` Maybe you could write it down for me, huh??

Print it in real big letters, an' I can cipher it out later ''.

`` Aah, go on '', she said.

`` Just go the hell on ''.

He grinned, nodded, and walked around to the front of the car.

Lips pursed mournfully, he stared down at its crazily sagging left side.

Then he hunkered down on the heels of his handmade boots, peered into the orderly chaos of axle, shock absorber, and spring.

He went prone on his stomach, the better to pursue his examination.

After a time, he straightened again, brushing the red Permian dust from his hands, slapping it from his six-dollar levis and his tailored, twenty-five-dollar shirt.

He wore no gun -- a strange ommission for a peace officer in this country.

Never, he'd once told Joyce, had he encountered any man or situation that called for a gun.

And he really feels that way, she thought.

That's really all he's got, all he is.

Just a big pile of self-confidence in an almost teensy package.

If I could make myself feel the same way

She studied him hopefully, yearningly;;

against the limitless background of sky and wasteland it was easy to confirm her analysis.

Here in the God-forsaken place, the westerly end of nowhere, Tom Lord looked almost insignificant, almost contemptible.

He was handsome, with his coal-black hair and eyes, his fine-chiseled features.

But she'd known plenty of handsomer guys, and, conceding his good looks, what was there left??

He wasn't a big man;;

rather on the medium side.

Neither was he very powerful of build.

He could move very quickly, she knew( although he seldom found occasion to do so), but he was more wiry than truly strong.

And his relatively small hands and feet gave him an almost delicate appearance.

Just nothing, she told herself.

Just so darned sure of himself that he puts the Indian sign on everyone.

But, by gosh, I want him and I'm going to have him!!

He caught her eye, came back around the car with the boot-wearer;;

teetering, half-mincing walk.

Why did these yokels still wear boots, anyway, when most had scarcely sat a horse in years??

He slid in at her side, tucked a cigar into his mouth, and politely proffered one to her.

`` Oh, cut it out, Tom ''!!

She snapped.

`` Can't you stop that stupid clowning for even a minute ''??

`` This ain't your brand, maybe '', Lord suggested.

`` Or maybe you just don't feel like a cigar ''??

`` I feel like getting back to town, that's what I feel like!!

Now, are you going to take me or am I supposed to walk ''??

`` Might get there faster walkin' '', Lord drawled, `` seein' as how I got a busted front spring.

On the other hand, howsomever, maybe you wouldn't either.

I figger it's probl'y a sixty-five-mile walk, and I c'n maybe get this spring patched up in a couple of hours ''.

`` How -- with what??

There's nothing out here but rattlesnakes ''.

`` Now, ain't it the truth ''??

Lord laughed with secret amusement.

`` Not a danged thing but rattlesnakes, so I reckon I'll get the boss rattler to help me ''.

`` Tom!!

For God's sake ''!!

`` Looky ''.

He pointed, cutting her off.

`` See that wildcat ''??

She saw it then, the distant derrick of the wildcat -- a test well in unexplored country.

And even with her limited knowledge of such things, she knew that the car could be repaired there;;

sufficiently, at least, to get them back into town.

A wildcatter had to be prepared for almost any emergency.

He had to depend on himself, since he was invariably miles and hours away from others.

`` Well, let's get going '', she said impatiently.

`` I '' -- She broke off, frowning.

`` What did you mean by that rattlesnake gag??

Getting the boss rattlesnake to help you ''??

`` Why, I meant what I said '', Lord declared.

`` What else would I mean, anyways ''??

She looked at him, lips compressed.

Then, with a shrug of pretended indifference, she took a compact from her purse and went through the motions of fixing her make-up.

In his mood, it was the best way to handle him;;

that is, to show no curiosity whatsoever.

Otherwise, she would be baited into a tantrum -- teased and provoked until she lost control of herself, and thus lost still another battle in the maddening struggle of Tom Lord Vs. Joyce Lakewood.

The car lurched along at a snail's crawl, the left-front mudguard banging and scraping against the tire, occasionally scraping against the road itself.

Lord whistled tunelessly as he fought the steering wheel.

He seemed very pleased with himself, as though some intricate scheme was working out exactly as he had planned.

Along with this self-satisfaction, however, Joyce sensed a growing tension.

It poured out of him like an electric current, a feeling that the muscles and nerves of his fine-drawn body were coiling for action, and that that action would be all that he anticipated.

Joyce had seen him like this once before -- more than once, actually, but on one particularly memorable occasion.

That was the day that he had practically mopped up the main street of Big Sands with Aaron McBride, field boss for the Highlands Oil& Gas Company.

Tom had been laying for Aaron McBride for a long time, just waiting to catch him out of line.

McBride gave him his opportunity when he showed up in town with a pistol on his hip.

He had a legitimate reason for wearing it.

It was payday for Highlands, and he was packing a lot of money back into the oil fields.

Moreover, as long as the weapon was carried openly, the sheriff's office had made no previous issue of it.

`` So what's this all about ''??

He demanded, when Lord confronted him.

I'm not the only man in town with a gun, or the only one without a permit ''.

It was the wrong thing to say.

By failing to do as he was told instantly -- to take out a permit or return the gun to his car -- he had played into Lord's hands.

The trouble was that he had virtually had to protest.

The deputy had forced him to by his manner of accosting him.

So, `` How about it ''??

He said.

`` Why single me out on this permit deal ''??

`` Well, I'll tell you about that '', Lord told him.

`` We aim t' be see-lective, y'know??

Don't like to bother no one unless we have to, which I figger we do, in your case.

Figger we got to be plumb careful with any of you Highlands big shots ''.

McBride reddened.

He himself had heard that there was gangster money in the company, but that had nothing to do with him.

He was an honest man doing a hard job, and the implication that he was anything else was unbearable.

`` Look, Lord '', he said hoarsely.

`` I know you've got a grudge against me, and maybe I can't blame you.

You think that Highlands swindled you and I helped 'em do it.

But you're all wrong, man!!

I'm no lawyer.

I just do what I'm told, and '' --

`` uh-huh.

An' that could mean trouble with a fella that's workin' for crooks.

So you get rid of that pistol right now, Mis-ter McBride.

You do that or take you out a permit right now ''.

McBride couldn't do either, of course.

Not immediately, as the deputy demanded.

Not without a face-saving respite of at least a few minutes.

To do so would make his job well-nigh impossible.

Oil-field workers were a rough-tough lot.

How could he exert authority over them -- make them toe the line, as he had to -- if he knuckled under to this small-town clown??

`` I'll get around to it a little later '', he mumbled desperately.

`` Just as soon as I go to the bank, and '' --

`` huh-uh.

Now, Mis-ter McBride '', said Lord, and he laid a firmly restraining hand on the field boss's arm.

It was strictly the deputy's game, but McBride had gone too far to throw in.

Now, he could only play the last card in what was probably the world's coldest deck.

He flung off Lord's hand and attempted to push past him, inadvertently shoving him into a storefront.

It was practically the last move that McBride made of his own volition.

Lord slugged him in the stomach, so hard that the organ almost pressed against his spine.

Then, as he doubled, gasping, vomiting the breakfast he had so lately eaten, Lord straightened him with an uppercut.

A rabbit punch redoubled him.

And then there was a numbing blow to the heart, and another gut-flattening blow to the stomach

But he couldn't keep up with them.

No more could he defend himself against them.

He seemed to be fighting not one man but a dozen.

And he could no longer think of face-saving, of honor, but only of escape.

Why, he's going to kill me, he thought wildly.

I meant him no harm.

I've given willful hurt to no man.

I was just doing my job, just following orders, and for that he's going to kill me.

Beat me to death in front of a hundred people.

Somehow more terrible than the certainty that he was about to die was the knowledge that Lord would probably not suffer for it: the murder would go unpunished.

He, McBride, would be cited as in the wrong, and he, Lord, would go scot-free, an officer who had only done his duty, though perhaps too energetically.

McBride staggered into the street, flopped sprawling in the stinging dust.

Fear-maddened, fleeing the lengthening shadow of death, he scrambled to his feet again.

He couldn't see;;

he was long past the point of coherent thinking.

Dimly, he heard laughter, hoots of derision, but he could not read the racket properly.

He could not grasp that Lord had withdrawn from the fight minutes ago, and that his leaden arms were flailing at nothing but the air.

He hated them too much to understand -- the people of this isolated law-unto-itself world that was Lord's world.

This, he was sure, was the way they would act;;

laughing at a dying man, laughing as a man was beaten to death.

And nothing would be done about it.

Nothing unless

Donna!!

Donna, his young wife, the girl who was both daughter and wife to him.

Donna was like he was.

She lived by the rules, never compromising, never blinded or diverted by circumstance.

And Donna would --

When he regained consciousness he was in Lord's house, in the office of Doctor Lord, the deputy's deceased father.

The Brannon outfit -- known as the Slash-B because of its brand -- reached Hondo Creek before sundown.

The herd was watered and then thrown onto a broad grass flat which was to be the first night's bedground.

Two of the new hands, a Mexican named Jose Amado and a kid known only as Laredo, were picked for the first trick of riding night herd.

The rest of the crew offsaddled their mounts and turned them into the remuda.

They got tin cups of coffee from the big pot on the coosie's fire, rolled and lighted brown-paper cigarettes, lounged about.

There was some idle talk, a listless discussion of this or that small happening during the day's drive.

But they deliberately avoided the one subject that had them all curious: the failure of the boss's wife and son to join the outfit.

It especially bothered the older hands.

The cook, Mateo Garcia, had arrived there long before the herd.

He'd started a fire and put coffee on, and now was busy at the work board of his chuck wagon.

He was readying a batch of sourdough biscuits for the Dutch oven.

Supper would be ready within the hour.

The Maguire family was setting up a separate camp nearby.

Billie had unhitched the mules from both Tom Brannon's and his father's wagon.

Hank had gathered wood for a cookfire, and his wife was busy at it now.

Conchita kept an eye on the twins and little Elena, trying to keep them from falling into the creek by which they persisted in playing.

Conchita nagged at the younger children, attempting without success to keep her thoughts off Tom Brannon.

Tom Brannon had caught up with the outfit shortly after the Maguires joined it, which had been at midday.

He'd come alone, without his wife and child.

He'd been in an angry mood: Conchita had thought his face almost ugly with the anger in him.

She wondered what had taken place in town, between him and his wife.

She wished that she could talk to her mother about it.

Not that her mother knew what had happened, but they could speculate upon it.

But her mother would rebuke her if she mentioned it, and say that it was none of her concern.

`` Pat, get out of that creek!!

You too, Sean!!

Elena, you'll get mud all over your dress ''!!

Even as she called to the children, Conchita let her gaze seek Tom Brannon.

Tomas, she called him -- as the Mexican hands did.

He was in earnest conversation with her father and the old vaquero, Luis Hernandez.

Whatever they are talking about??

Conchita wondered.

It bothered her that she probably would never know.

Certainly, she wouldn't dare ask her father afterward.

He would tell her not to pry into grownups' affairs -- as though she were a little kid like Elena!!

At the moment, the three men were not saying much of anything.

They were sitting on their heels, rider-fashion, over by the still empty calf wagon.

Brannon was hunkered down with his broad back to the left rear wheel, with the other two facing him.

He held a cigarette in his right hand.

It was burning away, forgotten.

His face was clouded with unhappiness.

He'd told Hank Maguire and Luis Hernandez about his wife's refusal to come with him and about what he now intended to do.

They were considering it gravely, neither seeming to like what he planned.

Finally Hernandez said, `` I could offer you advice, Tomas, but you wouldn't heed it ''.

`` Let's hear it, anyway ''.

`` Wait a little while.

Let Senora Brannon live in her father's house for a time.

Give her time to miss you.

Maybe she will then come to you.

After all, you want the senora as much as you want the boy.

You need her even more than you need him ''.

`` She won't change her mind '', Brannon said.

`` John Clayton will see to that ''.

`` But after a time away from you.

''

`` A year, Luis??

Five??

Ten??

How long should I wait ''??

`` Maybe in a year, Tomas.

''

`` In a year she'll like living in Clayton's house too much to come back to me '', Brannon said flatly.

`` And the boy will be too much under his influence by then.

I've got to take Danny away from Clayton before I lose him altogether.

Hell, in a year or five or ten, the boy will have forgotten me -- his own father ''!!

`` But to take him and leave his mother behind is not good ''.

`` In my place, you'd follow such advice as you give me ''??

Hernandez looked suddenly uncertain.

`` That I can't answer, for I can't imagine something like this happening to me.

Maybe I should withdraw my advice -- no ''??

Brannon looked at Hank Maguire.

`` And you??

What would you do in my place ''??

Hank shook his head.

`` I don't know, Tom.

Like Luis, I can't see something like this happening to me.

With Maria and me, there's never any problem.

Where I go, she goes -- and the kids with us.

You're going to need your woman.

And the boy will need his mother.

If you take the one, you'd better take both ''.

Brannon shook his head.

`` I won't force Beth to come against her will.

But I'm going to have my son ''.

They were silent for a little while, each looking glum.

Finally Luis Hernandez said, `` What must be, must be.

I am with you, of course, Tomas ''.

And Hank Maguire added, `` So am I, Tom ''.

`` All right '', Brannon said, rising.

`` We'll ride out as soon as we've had chuck ''.

Brannon timed it so that they rode in an hour after nightfall.

They had for cover both darkness and a summer storm.

During much of the fifteen-mile ride they had watched a lurid display of lightning in the sky to the east.

Later, they'd heard the rumble of thunder and then, just outside Rockfork, they ran into rain.

Those who had slickers donned them.

The others put on old coats or ducking jackets, whichever they carried behind their saddle cantles.

There were seven of them, enough for a show of strength -- to run a bluff.

It was to be nothing more than that.

There was to be no gunplay.

If the bluff failed and they ran into trouble, Brannon had told the others, they would withdraw -- and he would come after his son another time.

He didn't want to put himself outside the law.

With him were Hank Maguire, Luis Hernandez, and Luis's son Pedro.

The Ramirez brothers were also along.

The seventh man was Red Hogan, a wiry little puncher with a wild streak and a liking for hell-raising.

They were all good men.

It was dark early, because of the storm.

Also because of the storm, the streets of Rockfork were deserted.

Lighted windows glowed jewel-bright through the downpour.

They reined in before the town marshal's office, a box-sized building on Main Street.

A lamp burned inside, but Brannon, peering through the window, saw that the office was empty.

He'd hoped to catch Jesse Macklin there.

`` Probably just stepped out '', he said.

`` Maybe to have supper.

Red, come along.

The rest of you wait here ''.

With Red Hogan, he rode to the Welcome Cafe.

Hogan got down from the saddle and had a look inside.

`` Not there '', he said, getting back onto his horse.

`` Maybe he's at the hotel ''.

They rode to the Rockfork House, a little farther along the opposite side of the street.

They reined in there, Brannon remaining in the saddle while Hogan went to look for Jesse Macklin in the hotel dining room.

Brannon had no slicker.

He'd put on his old brown corduroy coat and it was already soaked.

But he felt no physical discomfort.

He was only vaguely aware of the sluicing rain.

He hardly noticed the blue-green flashes of lightning and the hard claps of thunder.

Hogan reappeared, stopped on the hotel porch, lifted a hand in signal.

Brannon dismounted and climbed the steps.

`` He's finished eating '', Hogan said.

`` Sitting with a cup of coffee now.

It shouldn't be long ''.

It seemed long, at least to Tom Brannon.

He and Hogan waited by the door, one to either side.

Macklin was the third man to come out, and he came unhurriedly.

He was puffing on a cigar, and he was turning up his coat collar against the rain.

It was not until he moved across the porch that he became aware of them, and then it was too late.

They closed in fast, kept him from reaching inside his coat for his gun.

`` Just come along '', Brannon told him.

`` Don't start anything you can't finish ''.

`` Now, listen '' -- Macklin began.

`` We'll talk over at your office ''.

`` Brannon, I warn you ''!!

`` Let's go, Marshal '', Brannon said, and took him by the arm.

Hogan gripped the lawman's other arm.

They escorted him down from the porch and through the rain to his office.

The other five Slash-B men followed them inside, crowding the small room.

His face was stiff with anger when they let go of his arms.

He looked at each of them in turn, Brannon last of all.

`` I'll remember you '', he said.

`` Every last one of you.

As for you, Brannon '' --

`` Put your gun on the desk, Marshal ''.

`` Now, hold on, damn it;;

I won't '' --

Red Hogan's patience ran out.

He lifted the skirt of Macklin's coat, took his gun from its holster, tossed it onto the desk.

`` Too much fooling around '', he said.

`` Don't press your luck, badge-toter ''.

Brannon said, `` Now the key to the lockup, Marshal ''.

`` Key ''??

Macklin said.

`` What for ''??

`` Can't you guess ''??

Brannon said.

`` We're putting you where you won't come to harm.

Come on -- the key.

Get it out ''!!

`` Damned if I will.

Brannon, you've assaulted a law officer and '' --

They moved in on him, crowded him from all sides.

No man laid a hand on him, but the threat of violence was there.

His face took on a sudden pallor, became beaded with sweat, and he seemed to have trouble with his breathing.

He held out a moment longer, then his nerve gave under the pressure.

He swore, and said, `` All right.

It's here in my pocket ''.

`` Get it out '', Brannon ordered.

Then, as Macklin obeyed: `` Now let's go out back ''.

Resignedly, Macklin turned to the back door.

They followed him into the rain and across to the squat stone building fifty feet to the rear.

The door of the lockup was of oak planks and banded with strap iron.

It was secured by an oversized padlock.

Macklin balked again, not wanting to unlock and open the door.

They crowded him in that threatening way once more, forced him to give in.

Once the door was open, they crowded him inside the dark building.

He was uttering threats in a low but savage voice when they closed and padlocked the door.

They returned to the street, mounted their horses, rode through the rain to the big house on Houston Street.

Its windows glowed with lamplight.

Deputy Marshal Luke Harper still stood guard on the veranda, a forlorn, scarecrowish figure in the murky dark.

He came to the edge of the veranda, peered down at them with his hand on his gun.

`` Don't try it '', Brannon told him, dismounting and starting up the steps with his men following.

`` Don't get yourself killed for something that doesn't concern you ''.

He strode past the now frightened man, entered the house.

Miguel and Arturo Ramirez remained on the veranda to keep Harper from interfering.

The others followed Brannon inside.

They trailed him across the wide hallway to the parlor, four roughly garbed and tough-looking men who probably had never before ventured into such a house.

They brought to it all the odors that clung to men like themselves, that of their own sweat, of campfire smoke, of horses and cattle.

They tracked mud on the oaken floor, on the carpet.

Their presence fouled the elegance of that room.

And their arrival caught John Clayton and Charles Ansley off guard.

The author of the anonymous notes seemed to be all-knowing.

For men who had left cattle alone after getting their first notices had received no second.

But the day of the deadline came and passed, and the men who had scoffed at the warnings laughed with satisfaction.

For, with a single exception, nothing had happened to them.

The exception was an Iron Mountain settler named William Lewis.

After walking out to his corral that morning, he'd been amazed to see the dust puff up in front of his feet.

A split second later, the distant crack of a rifle had sounded.

He'd mounted up immediately and raced with a revolver ready toward the spot from which he'd estimated the shot had come.

But he had found all of the thickets and points of cover deserted.

There had been no sign of a rifleman and no track or trace to show that anyone had been near.

Lewis was a man who had made a full-time job of cow stealing.

He hadn't even pretended to be farming his spread.

His land had never been plowed.

He had done his rustling openly and boasted about it.

He had received both first and second anonymous notices, and each time he had accused his neighbors of writing them.

He had cursed at them and threatened them.

He was a man, those neighbors testified later, who didn't have a friend in the world.

William Lewis made the rounds of all who lived near him again, that August morning after a bullet landed at his feet, and once more he accused and threatened everyone.

`` I'll be ready next time ''!!

He raged.

`` I'll be shootin' right back ''.

He had his chance the very next morning, for exactly the same thing happened again.

This time Lewis had his own rifle in his hands, and he threw some answering fire back at the mysterious far-off shot, then spent most of the day searching out the area.

He found nothing, but he still refused to give up and move out.

`` Just let me meet up with that damned bushwhackin' coward face-to-face ''!!

He exploded.

`` That's all I ask ''!!

He never got that chance.

For the unseen, ghostlike rifleman aimed a little higher the third time.

A bullet smashed directly into the center of William Lewis' chest.

He slumped against a log fence rail, then tried to lift himself.

Two more shots followed in quick succession, dropping him limp and huddled on the ground.

An inquest was held, and after a good deal of testimony about the anonymous notes, the county coroner estimated that the shooting had been done from a distance of 300 yards.

Rumors of the offer Tom Horn had made at the Stockgrowers' Association meeting had leaked out by then, and as a grand jury investigation of the murder got underway, the prosecuting attorney, a Colonel Baird, ordered that the tall stock detective be summoned for questioning.

It took some time to locate Horn.

He was finally found in the Bates Hole region of Natrona County, two counties away.

Prosecutor Baird immediately assumed he was hiding out there after the shooting and began preparing an indictment.

But that indictment was never made.

For Tom Horn, it turned out, had a number of rancher and cowboy witnesses ready and willing to swear with straight faces that he had been in Bates Hole the day of the killing.

The former scout's alibi couldn't be shaken.

The authorities had to release him.

He immediately rode on to Cheyenne, threw a ten-day drinking spree and dropped some very strong hints among friends.

`` Dead center at three hundred yards, that coroner said ''!!

He'd grin.

`` Three shots in that fella 'fore he hit the ground!!

You reckon there's two men in this state can shoot like that ''??

Publicly, he denied everything.

Privately, he created and magnified an image of himself as a hired assassin.

For a blood-chilling ring of terror to the very sound of his name was the tool he needed for the job he'd promised to do.

Tom Horn was soon back at work, giving his secret employers their money's worth.

A good many beef-hungry settlers were accepting the death of William Lewis as proof that the warning notes were not idle threats.

The company herds were being raided less often, and cabins and soddies all over the range were standing deserted.

But there were other homesteaders who passed the Lewis murder off as a personal grudge killing, the work of one of his neighbors.

The rustling problem was by no means solved.

Even in the very area where the shooting had been done, cattle were still disappearing.

For less than a dozen miles from the unplowed land of the dead man lived another settler who had ignored the warnings that his existence might be foreclosed on -- a blatant and defiant rustler named Fred Powell.

`` Fred was mighty crude about the way he took in cattle '' his own hired man, Andy Ross, mentioned later.

`` Everyone knew it, but he sort of acted like he didn't care who knew it -- even after them notes came, even after he'd heard about Lewis, even after he'd been shot at a couple o' times hisself ''!!

On the morning of September 10, 1895, Powell and Ross rose at dawn and began their day's work.

Haying time was close at hand, and they needed some strong branches to repair a hay rack.

Harnessing a team to a buckboard, they drove out to a willow-lined creek about a half-mile off, then climbed down and began chopping.

Andy Ross had just started swinging an ax at his second willow when the distant blast of a rifle sounded.

He looked around in surprise, then noticed that Fred Powell was clutching his chest.

The hired man ran over to help his boss.

`` My God, I'm shot ''!!

Powell gasped.

And he collapsed and died instantly.

Ross had no intention of searching for the assassin.

He heaved the dead man onto the buckboard, yelled and lashed at the team and got out of there fast.

But he brought back the sheriff and several deputies, and to the lawmen the entire affair seemed a repetition of the Lewis killing.

A detailed scouring of the entire area revealed nothing beyond a ledge of rocks that might have been the rifleman's hiding place.

There were no tracks of either hoofs or boots.

Not even an empty cartridge case could be found.

Once again, Tom Horn was the first and most likely suspect, and he was brought in for questioning immediately.

Once again, he shook his head, kept his face expressionless and his voice very calm, and had a strongly supported alibi ready.

Later, riding in for some lusty enjoyment of the liquor and professional ladies of Cheyenne, he laid claim to the killing with the vague insinuations he made.

`` Exterminatin' cow thieves is just a business proposition with me '', he'd blandly announce.

`` And I sort o' got a corner on the market ''.

`` Tom '', a friend asked him once, `` how come you bushwhacked them rustlers??

They wouldn't o' stood no chance with you in a plain, straight-out shoot-down ''.

He had lots of friends, then as always.

Even as he became widely known as a professional killer, nearly every cowboy and rancher in Wyoming seemed proud to call him a friend.

No man's name brought more cheers when it was announced in a rodeo.

`` Well '', he explained, `` s'posin' you was a nester swingin' the long rope??

Which would you be most scairt of -- a dry-gulchin' or a shoot-down ''??

`` Yeah, I can see that '', the friend was forced to agree.

`` But well, it just don't seem sportin' somehow ''!!

`` Sportin' ''!!

The tall sunburnt rustler-hunter stared in amazement.

`` Sportin' ''!!

He echoed again in soft wonder.

`` I seen a lot o' things in my time.

I found a trooper once the Apache had spread-eagled on an ant hill, and another time we ran across some teamsters they'd caught, tied upside down on their own wagon wheels over little fires until their brains was exploded right out o' their skulls.

I heard o' Texas cattlemen wrappin' a cow thief up in green hides and lettin' the sun shrink 'em and squeeze him to death.

But there's one thing I never seen or heard of, one thing I just don't think there is, and that's a sportin' way o' killin' a man ''!!

After the first two murders, the warning notes were rarely ignored.

The lesson had been learned.

The examples were plain.

When Fred Powell's brother-in-law, Charlie Keane, moved into the dead man's home, the anonymous letter writer took no chances on Charlie taking up where Fred had left off and wasted no time on a first notice:

If you don't leave this country within 3 days, your life will be taken the same as Powell's was.

This was the message found tacked to the cabin door.

Keane left, within three days.

All through Albany and Laramie counties, other men were doing the same.

Houses of settlers who'd treated the company herds as a natural resource, free for the taking, were sitting empty, with weeds growing high in their yards.

The small half-heartedly tended fields of men who'd spent more time rustling cattle than farming were lying fallow.

No cow thief could count on a jury of his sympathetic peers to free him any longer.

Jury, judge and executioner were riding the range in the form of a single unknown figure that could materialize anywhere, at any time, to dispense an ancient brand of justice the men of the new West had believed long outdated.

For three straight years, Tom Horn patrolled the southern Wyoming pastures, and how many men he killed after Lewis and Powell( if he killed Lewis and Powell) will never be known.

It is possible, although highly doubtful, that he killed none at all but merely let his reputation work for him by privately claiming every unsolved murder in the state.

It is also possible, but equally doubtful, that he actually shot down the hundreds of men with which his legend credits him.

For that legend was growing explosively, Rumor was insisting he received a price of $600 a man.

( The best evidence is that he received a monthly wage of about $125, very good money in an era when top hands worked for $30 and found.

) Rumor had it he slipped two small rocks under each victim's head as a sort of trademark.

( A detailed search of old coroner's reports fails to substantiate this in the slightest.

)

One thing was certain -- his method was effective, so effective that after a time even the warning notices were often unnecessary.

The mere fact that the tall figure with the rifle and field glasses had been seen riding that way was enough to frighten three rustling homesteaders out of the Upper Laramie country in a single week.

`` My reputation's my stock in trade '', Tom mentioned more than once.

He evidently couldn't foresee that it might be his downfall in the end.

He had made himself the personification of the Devil to the homesteaders.

But to the cattlemen who had been facing bankruptcy from rustling losses and to the cowboys who had been faced with lay-offs a few years earlier, he was becoming a vastly different type of legendary figure.

Such ranchers as Coble and Clay and the Bosler brothers carried him on their books as a cowhand even while he was receiving a much larger salary from parties unknown.

He made their spreads his headquarters, and he helped out in their roundups.

In the cow camps, Tom Horn was regarded as a hero, as the same kind of champion he was when he entered and invariably won the local rodeos.

The hands and their bosses saw him as a lone knight of the range, waging a dedicated crusade against a lawless new society that was threatening a beloved way of life.

The wailing, guitar-strumming minstrels of the cattle kingdom made up songs about him.

By 1898, rustling losses had been driven down to the lowest level ever seen in Wyoming.

When several minutes had passed and Curt hadn't emerged from the livery stable, Brenner reentered the hotel and faced Summers across the counter.

`` I have a little job for you, Charlie.

I'm sure you won't mind doing me a small favor ''.

Brenner's voice was oily, but Summers wasn't fooled.

He moistened his lips uneasily.

`` What is it you want me to do, Mr. Brenner ''??

Brenner shrugged carelessly.

`` It's very simple.

I just want you to take a message to Diane Molinari.

Tell her to come here to the hotel ''.

Vastly relieved, Summers nodded and started toward the door.

`` One thing, Summers '', Brenner said.

`` You're not to mention my name.

Tell her Curt Adams wants to see her ''.

Summers pulled up short, and turned around.

`` I don't know, Mr. Brenner '', he said haltingly, beginning to get an inkling of Brenner's plans.

`` It doesn't seem quite right, telling her a thing like that.

Couldn't I just '' -- His voice trailed off into silence.

Brenner continued to smile, but his eyes were cold.

He turned and looked around at the lobby as though seeing things he hadn't before noticed.

`` You know, Summers '', he said thoughtfully.

`` Eagle's Nest ought to have a fire company.

If someone were to drop a match in here, this place would go up like a haystack ''.

He started toward the stairway, then turned to add, `` Tell her to come to Adams's room, that Adams is in trouble.

Tell her to hurry ''.

`` Yes sir ''.

His face pale, Summers headed for the street.

Curt's visit to the livery stable had been merely a precaution in case anyone should be watching.

He paused only long enough to ascertain that Jess's buckskin was still missing and that his own gray was all right, then climbed through a back window and dropped to the ground outside.

The fact that Jess's horse had not been returned to its stall could indicate that Diane's information had been wrong, but Curt didn't interpret it this way.

A man like Jess would want to have a ready means of escape in case it was needed.

Probably his horse would be close to where he was hiding.

From the back of the barn it was a simple matter to reach Black's house without using the street.

Curt approached the place cautiously, and watched it several minutes from the protection of a grove of trees.

There was a light in Black's front room, but drawn curtains prevented any view of the interior.

Curt circled the house and located a barn out back.

He could hear horses moving around inside, and nothing else.

There was no lock on the door, only an iron hook which he unfastened.

He opened the door and went in, pulling it shut behind him.

Again he stood in the darkness listening, but there was only the scrape of a shod hoof on a plank floor.

He moved ahead carefully, his left hand in front of him, and came to a wooden partition.

Horse smell was very strong, and he could hear the crunch of grain being ground between strong jaws.

He found a match in his pocket and lit it.

There were two horses in the barn, a sway-backed dun and Jess Crouch's buckskin.

Curt snuffed out the match.

It was certain now that Jess was in the house, but also, presumably, was Stacey Black.

Curt wanted to get Jess alone, without interference from anyone, even as spineless a person as the store owner.

He studied the problem for a few seconds and thought of a means by which it might be solved.

Reaching across the side of the stall, he slapped the buckskin on the rump.

The startled animal let out a terrified squeal and thrashed around in the stall.

As Curt had hoped, the house door banged open.

He slapped the buckskin again and it kicked wildly, its hoofs rattling the side of the stall.

Curt moved over beside the door and waited.

Presently he heard footsteps crossing the yard, and Jess's smothered curses.

The door swung open, and Jess said sourly, `` What the hell's the matter with you??

''

The horse continued to snort.

Curt doubted that any animal belonging to Jess would find much reassurance in its owner's voice.

Jess cursed again, and entered the barn.

A match flared, and he reached above his head to light a lantern which hung from a wire loop.

As he crossed to the side of the stall, Curt drew his gun and clicked back the hammer.

`` Before you try anything '', he said.

`` Remember what happened to Gruller ''.

Jess caught his breath in surprise.

He started to reach for his gun, but apparently thought better of it.

`` That's the stuff '', Curt said.

`` Just hold it that way ''.

He reached out to pull the door shut and fasten it with a sliding bolt.

`` You and I have a little talking to do, Jess.

You won't be needing this ''.

He moved up and lifted Jess's pistol out of its holster.

`` Damn you, Adams '' -- Jess was beginning to recover from his initial shock.

`` We ain't got nothing to talk about.

If I don't come back in the house, Breed's going to '' --

`` Your trigger-happy brother isn't in the house.

About now he's probably having supper.

That long ride the four of you took must've given him a good appetite.

Now turn around so I can see your face ''.

Jess turned.

There was raw fury in his eyes, and the veins of his neck were swollen.

`` You're about as dumb as they come, Adams.

I don't know what you're up to, but when Brenner '' --

`` You can forget about Brenner, too '', Curt said.

`` It's Ben Arbuckle we're going to talk about ''.

`` Arbuckle ''??

Jess stiffened.

`` I don't know nothin' about him ''.

`` No??

I suppose you don't know anything about a piece of two-by-four, either;;

one with blood all over it, Arbuckle's blood ''.

Curt's fingers put a little more pressure on the trigger of his gun.

`` So help me, Crouch, I'd like to kill you where you stand, but, before I do, I'm going to hear you admit killing him.

Now start talking.

Who told you to do it??

Was it Dutch Brenner ''??

Curt was holding Jess's gun in his left hand.

He drew back his arm to slash the gunbarrel across Jess's face, but didn't finish the motion.

Pistol-whipping an unarmed man might come easy to someone like Jess, but Curt couldn't bring himself to do it.

Apparently sensing this, and realizing that it gave him an advantage, Jess became bold.

`` Having all the guns makes you a big man, don't it, Adams??

If we was both armed, you wouldn't talk so tough ''.

`` No ''??

Curt reached out and dropped Jess's pistol back into the holster.

He retreated a step and holstered his own.

`` All right, Crouch;;

we're on even terms.

Now draw ''!!

Sweat bubbled out on Jess's swarthy face.

The fingers of his right hand twisted into a claw, but he didn't reach for the gun.

Curt, angry enough to be a little reckless, raised his hands shoulder high.

`` Does this make it any easier, coward ''??

`` I ain't drawin' against you '', Jess said thickly.

`` I heard how you outdrew Chico.

I ain't a gunslinger ''.

`` No.

You're the kind of bastard who sneaks up on a man from behind and hits him with a club.

I just wanted to hear you say so ''.

Jess stared at him without answering and let his hands fall to his sides.

He had found Curt's weakness, or what to Jess was a weakness, and was smart enough to take advantage of it.

Somewhere in the distance, a woman screamed.

Curt was too involved in his own problems to pay much attention.

He had to make Jess talk, and he had to do it before Stacey Black got curious and came to investigate.

Once more he lifted Jess's gun from its holster, only this time he tossed it into the stall with the frightened buckskin.

He dropped his own beside it.

`` We'll do it another way, then '', he said harshly.

Jess's coarse features twisted in a surprised grin which was smashed out of shape by Curt's fist.

With a roar of pain and fury Jess made his attack.

Curt managed to duck beneath the man's flailing fist, and drove home a solid left to Jess's mid-section.

It was like hitting a sack of salt.

Pain shot up Curt's arm clear to the shoulder, but Jess seemed hardly aware that he had been hit.

He slammed into the wall, bounced back, and caught Curt with a roundhouse right which sent him spinning.

An inch lower and it would have knocked him out.

As it was, his vision blurred and for a moment he was unable to move.

When his eyes began to focus, he saw Jess charging at him with a pitchfork.

Curt twisted to one side, and the tines of the fork bit into the floor.

Jess wasted a few seconds trying to yank them loose.

It gave Curt time to stagger to his feet.

The tines broke off under Jess's twisting, and he swung the handle in an attempt to knock Curt's brains out.

His aim was hurried;;

so the pitchfork whistled over Curt's head.

By now Curt was seeing clearly again.

He stepped inside Jess's guard and landed two blows to the big man's belly, putting everything he had behind them.

They made Jess double over.

When his head came down, Curt grabbed him by the hair and catapulted him head first into the wall.

The building shook, setting the lantern to swaying, and the buckskin to pitching again.

Even Black's old crowbait began to snort, and from the house Black yelled, `` Jess!!

What's going on out there ''??

Jess didn't seem too sure himself.

He lurched drunkenly to his feet, lowered his head, and took one step away from the wall.

Curt caught him flush on the nose with a blow which started at the floor.

Jess had had enough.

Blood gushed from his nose, and he backed off as rapidly as he could, stumbling over his own feet in his frantic haste to get away from Curt's fists.

Curt was in almost as bad shape, but he wouldn't quit.

He backed Jess into a corner, grabbed a handful of the man's shirtfront, and drew back his right fist.

`` Tell me about Arbuckle!!

You killed him, didn't you ''??

`` It was Brenner's idea '', Jess mumbled, dabbing at his nose.

`` He found out about you and Arbuckle talking.

He wanted to show the town what happened to anyone who tried to start trouble ''.

`` You mean anyone who stood up for his rights '', Curt said.

He let go of the shirt, and Jess slumped to the floor.

Turning his back, Curt crossed to the stall, reached over to untie the buckskin's halter rope, and waved his hand in the animal's face.

The buckskin bolted out of the stall.

Curt moved in and picked up his gun.

He shook loose straw out of the action, and placed the gun in his holster.

Leaving Jess's where it lay, he left the stall.

`` Get up, Crouch.

We're going someplace ''.

Jess painfully got to his feet as someone rattled the door.

`` Who's in there ''??

Black called fearfully.

Curt opened the door, grabbed Black by the shoulder, and pulled him into the barn.

`` You're staying right here for a while.

This dirty coward just admitted killing Arbuckle.

I'm going to let him tell it to somebody else ''.

He shoved Black toward the stall, and pointed his pistol at Jess.

`` Get out of here.

You're coming along peacefully, or I'll put a bullet in your leg ''.

Jess stumbled through the door.

Curt followed, reaching behind him to shut the door and hook it.

Black would have little trouble getting out, but it might delay him a few minutes.

`` Where're you takin' me ''??

Jess asked worriedly.

`` We're going to Marshal Woods's house.

Maybe if the marshal hears this himself, it'll make a difference.

Somebody in this town must still have some backbone ''.

Over his shoulder he could see Max's loose grin and the Burnsides' glowering faces.

`` Honey '', he whispered.

`` Soon as we send them on their way and make camp, let's you and me go for a walk down by the Snake -- all by ourselves ''.

`` Sally '', admonished her mother, `` you've got all evening to visit with Dan.

His wounds need dressing now ''.

Mrs. Jackson's words recalled Dan to his lack of fitness for courting.

What a spectacle he was, caked with dirt and sweat and blood, filthy as a pig and naked as an Indian, kissing the finest, the sweetest, the bravest, and absolutely the prettiest girl in this whole wonderful world.

He released her reluctantly for her enthusiastic reunion with Old Hap.

`` Got a lot to tend to, but I'll get back quick as I can '', he assured her.

Dan could hear Clayton Burnside and Eben Jackson summing up their final reckoning for rental on the oxen.

Jackson was doing most of the talking.

So long as Sally's pa was coming out best on the haggle, Dan didn't feel the need of putting in his two-bits' worth.

Soon as the Burnsides moved on, he'd lead Rex down by the river;;

there he could shave and scrub himself up for the evening.

Damn it, he thought bitterly, picking up his shirt and staring at the fresh bullet hole in the sleeve.

If I hadn't got Nate stopped when I did, my duds'd all be shot plumb to hell!!

He stooped, picked up his ruined hat, and pursed his lips thoughtfully.

From the way the wound in his head was itching, Dan knew that it would heal.

But his only hat was something else again.

`` Nate!!

Nate ''!!

He shouted.

The Burnsides, now ready to roll, were purposefully deaf to his cry.

`` Nate ''!!

He bellowed to the retreating back directly in front of him.

`` I ain't going to fight you no more ''.

Nate turned his head, attempting to speak in a soothing voice.

`` I know you ain't ''!!

Dan affirmed, feeling ten feet tall.

He moved in close, jerked the handsome, broad-brimmed beaver hat from Nate's head and clamped it on his own.

`` Here's a present for you '', he said, shoving his bullet-riddled hat down over Nate's purpling forehead.

`` Me and you's trading hats so's you'll have something permanent to remember me by ''!!

Sally left her choring to stand beside Dan.

Slipping her hand in his, they silently watched the Burnsides make the bend in the road and disappear from sight.

Much as they had to look forward to, they didn't begrudge a moment of the time they spent seeing them go.

At first Matilda could not believe her own eyes.

She had spent too many hours looking ahead, hoping and longing to catch even a glimpse of Dan and finding nothing but emptiness.

And now she could see him, looking uncommon handsome, standing there beside Sally Jackson and her folks in front of their trail-worn wagon.

Seeing them waiting there at the foot of Emigrant Rock was so overwhelming that, for a good minute after they rounded the bend and started down the grade leading toward them, Matilda could not speak at all.

Then, with a glory that almost wiped out the deep, downward sags in her careworn face, Matilda leaned over the wheel and shouted to Hez, who was stumbling along in the heat and the dust on the opposite side of the wagon `` Pa!!

Pa!!

I can see Dan.

And he's with the Jacksons ''!!

`` What about Burnsides ''??

Hez asked, who still believed they'd have them to lick.

`` They ain't even in sight ''!!

She replied.

By then Hez could see for himself, and so could the others.

Soon they were all shouting greetings, exchanging smiles, and rejoicing to think that they were all back together again.

But even a reunion as joyous as this one did not make a break in the routines of the day.

Nor could they stop and find out about all that had happened until they made circle, tended the cattle, tethered the horses, gathered fuel, carried water, and started their cooking fires.

Then, and only then, with the Jacksons and Dan as their true guests of honor, did the Harrows take time to catch up on the news.

No sooner did they hear of Dan's injury than both Gran and Matilda went into immediate action.

The wound in his scalp was examined, pronounced healing, and well doctored with simples, before they dished up the victuals.

From then on, in keeping with the traditions they had followed since childhood, the whole group settled down to relish their food.

Even Sally, in spite of her gaiety and obvious welcome, followed the old taboo of `` quitting the gab when wearing the nosebag ''.

After their supper, the evening turned into a regular `` Hoe-Down ''.

Only, they carefully substituted old country folk dances for the Virginia Reels and square dances that were so popular among more worldly trains in the great westward migration.

But with Bill O'Connor on the fiddle, and Gran Harrow exuberantly shouting `` Glory Be '' and `` Hallelujah '' above their united chant of the lilting old ballads, they played their quaint folk games with all the fervor and abandon of a real celebration.

`` Golly '', Rod exclaimed to Harmony as he dutifully stood by her side among the ringed spectators, `` don't that fiddle make you wish the Bible didn't say us Baptists can't dance ''??

`` Nor Methodists, neither '', she replied.

`` Not that it matters to me, being this far along ''.

Rod gave her a warm pat on the shoulder before he replied.

`` Come spring, you'll be kicking up your heels and feeling coltish again too, gal ''.

At these words of sympathy and understanding, Harmony said generously, `` I don't mind setting here along with Gran while you go out and join in the games ''.

Rod shifted his eager eyes from the milling group out in the circle long enough to reply, `` I ain't much of a hand for Dare-Base and Farmer-in-the-Dell, but I'd sure like to get in on the handhold and wrestles ''.

He looked down at his big hands and slowly flexed his long fingers.

`` Don't reckon there's nobody out there, 'cept maybe Dan, who can outgrip me, Harmony ''.

With Rod on his way and Matilda visiting with Mrs. Jackson while they searched out familiar names on the face of the cliff, Harmony settled on the edge of the grub box, to ease the pressure of her swollen body on her bone-weary legs, and worried about all that might have happened to Sally.

And she was deeply thankful that she could see her now, out there in the midst of a gay, youthful circle, skipping and singing, `` Farmer in the dell, Farmer in the dell, Heigh-ho the dairy-oh, the farmer in the dell ''.

At the sight of Sally's happy face and carefree expression, Harmony's dark, brooding eyes quickly brightened with unshed tears.

She was glad, completely and unselfishly glad, to see that things were working out the right way for both Sally and Dan.

And she really tried to go a step further and say she hoped they'd be just as right as they now were for her and for Rod.

But she couldn't, not yet.

Not with the memory of her folks and the lost Conestoga still holding her close.

Out in the center of the circle the farmer, who was Dan, wasted no time when they came to the line, `` The farmer choose his wife ''.

With a swift swoop of his big arms, he grabbed Sally out of the circle surrounding him, and then kissed her soundly before setting her down so she could stand by his side while they jointly chose the rest of their `` outfit ''.

Soon the child, the dog, the cat and even the cheese, all joined them out there in the circle.

By now Harmony could see that most of the adults in the train were winded and resting, or else siphoned off from the games by the challenging lure of the great cliff towering above them.

No matter how many registry rocks they came to on this journey, each one exerted its own appeal.

Even strange names seemed to make them feel closer to some kind of civilization when stumbled across out here in this wilderness.

Already a few hardy folk from their own train were zealously chipping away at the register rocks, leaving their own records along with those made by the earlier trains.

Soon she saw Rod and Hez moving over to join them.

No sooner were they through and the guards posted, than the whole camp turned in for a night of sound sleep.

For Matilda, it was the first she had known in many a night.

Even the knowledge that she was losing another boy, as a mother always does when a marriage is made, did not prevent her from having the first carefree, dreamless sleep that she had known since they dropped down the canyon and into Bear Valley, way, way back there when they were crossing those other mountains.

Next morning, they moved on again.

`` My souls' a-gracious ''!!

Gran Harrow exclaimed, watching their rippling muscles as Rod and Dan swung her up into the load.

`` A body would swear I floated right up here on a cloud ''!!

Rod and Dan released their holds on the arms of her hickory rocker and exchanged embarrassed grins.

`` Shucks, Gran '', they said almost in unison.

`` That wasn't nothing at all ''!!

Leaning forward in her chair, Gran nearsightedly scrutinized Dan's face.

`` How's Sally like rubbin' agin that thar little ticklebrush ye're a-raising ''??

`` Quit ragging him, Gran '', Rod protested.

`` I ain't ragging him ''!!

Gran peered again at the week-old blond mustache shadowing Dan's upper lip.

`` But honest-to-Betsy, I've seed more hair than that on a piece o' bacon ''.

The two tall brothers waited silently while their mother handed Gran her cold snack and water jug, placed the chamber pot beside her feet, and returned to her place at the front of the wagon with Alice.

`` Rheumatics worse, Pa ''??

Dan asked Hez, who had limped back from his team to hold the notched-stick chair braces in place while his boys swung up the tailgate and tied it tight at the ends.

`` My right leg's stiff as a board this morning '', he replied.

`` But the sun'll fry it out'n me onct we git to rolling ''.

The three men stepped out to the side to wait for Captain Clemens' signal.

Hez looked up at the high face of Emigrant Rock, official signboard for the Raft River turnoff, and gloated, `` Seems funny that them Burnsides never took time to leave their John-Henry up thar ''.

`` Wonder what made them hurry so '', Rod drawled, giving Dan a sly wink.

Dan grinned, and changed the subject.

`` From now on, Sally and me and her folks aim to give you our turn when it comes up and fall in behind you and Rod's outfit ''.

`` Ain't no sense you eating our dust '', Rod protested.

`` Sally and her ma want to trade off on account of Harmony being so far along '', Dan explained.

`` Jackson recruited his critters, and him and me fixed up his wagon while we was waiting for you to catch up.

He's got the tightest running gear in the train now.

Besides, 'tain't no more'n right for me to follow with my black oxen, so's I can unhook and pull up fast if either of you get in a pinch ''.

Captain Clemens' signal shot sent the men hurrying to their waiting teams.

`` Reckon ye're right, Dan '', Hez called back over his shoulder.

`` I'll shore be needing ye both on the pull out o' the canyon ''.

Rod looked apprehensively ahead at the narrowing, precipice-walled gorge.

`` We'll double teams zigzagging up the mountain, Harmony '', he spoke reassuringly, concerned by the pinched look around her mouth.

`` Like enough we'll all be up on top by sundown ''.

Out of the corner of his eye, he could see his father's wheels beginning to turn.

Before Harmony had a chance to reply, Rod cracked his long whip over his thin oxen's backs.

While no larger than Dutch Springs, this mining supply town had the appearance of being far busier and more prosperous.

Men crowded the streets and freight rigs and teams were moving about.

Although they were forced to maintain a sharper watch, this activity enabled them to ride in and rack their broncs without any particular attention being paid them.

`` Gyp'll be holdin' forth in some bar if he's here at all '', Cobb declared, glancing along the street as they stretched their legs.

There were no less than six or seven saloons in Ganado, not counting the lower class dives, all vying for the trade of celebrating miners and teamsters.

Pat only nodded.

`` Take one side of the street, and I'll take the other '', he proposed.

`` If you spot Carmer give a yell before you move in ''.

Cobb's assent was tight.

`` You do the same.

It's all I ask, Stevens ''.

Separating, they took different sides of the main drag and systematically combed the bars.

Russ visited two places without result and his blood pressure was down to zero.

Suddenly it seemed to him insane that they might hope to locate Gyp Carmer so casually, even were he to prove the thief.

He tramped out of the Miners Rest with his hopes plummeting, and headed doggedly for the Palace Saloon, the last place of any consequence on this side of the street.

The Palace was an elaborate establishment, built practically on stilts in front, with long flights of wooden steps running up to the porch.

Behind its ornate facade the notorious dive clung like a bird's nest to the rocky ribs of the canyonside.

Russ ran up the steps quickly to the plank porch.

The front windows of the place were long and narrow, reaching nearly to the floor and affording an unusually good view of the interior.

Heading for the batwings, Cobb glanced perfunctorily through the nearest window, and suddenly dodged aside.

Nerves tight as a bowstring, he paused to gather his wits.

Against all expectation, Carmer was inside, clearly enjoying himself to the hilt and already so tipsy that it seemed unlikely he was bothering to note anything or anyone about him.

Fierce anger surged through Russ.

He fought down the impulse to rush in and collar the vicious puncher on the spot.

Reaching the porch rail beyond view of the bar windows, he feverishly scanned the busy street below.

Stevens was nowhere in sight.

Muffling an exclamation, Russ sprang to the nearest steps and ran down.

As luck had it, he had not gone twenty feet in the street before Pat appeared.

`` What luck, Cobb ''??

He said swiftly.

Russ pointed upward.

`` He's there '', he got out tersely, curbing his rising excitement.

Hitching his cartridge belt around, Pat glanced upward briefly at the Palace and started that way with Cobb at his side.

Climbing the steps steadily, they reached the top and headed for the door.

Pat pushed through first.

Forced behind him momentarily, Russ followed at once and halted two steps inside.

His eyes widened.

While five minutes ago the place had presented a scene of easy revelry, with Gyp Carmer a prominent figure, it was now as somnolent and dull as the day before payday.

Carmer himself was nowhere to be seen.

A man knocked the roulette ball about idly in its track, and another dozed at one of the card tables.

Two men murmured with their heads together at the end of the bar, while the sleek-headed bartender absently polished a glass.

Looking the setup over, Stevens started coolly for the rear of the place.

`` Where yuh goin' ''??

It was the barkeep.

Halting, Pat turned to survey him deliberately.

He did not reply, going on toward the back.

Less assured than the tall, wide-shouldered man in the lead, Cobb followed alertly, a hand on his gun butt.

The bartender measured this situation with heavy eyes and decided he wanted no part of it.

He said no more.

A hall opened in back of the bar, running toward an ell.

Pat moved into it.

Small rooms, probably for cards, opened off on either side.

All the doors were open at this hour except one, and it was toward this that Stevens made his way with Russ close at his shoulder.

The door was locked.

A single kick made it spring open, shuddering.

Pat saw Gyp Carmer staggering forward, a half-filled bottle upraised as if to strike.

Russ sprang through to bat it nimbly aside.

With a bellow Carmer lunged at him.

But he was more than half-drunk, and his faculties were dulled.

Cobb unleashed a single powerful jab that sent Gyp reeling wildly and crashing down with a whining groan.

He started to struggle up, heaving desperately.

Russ gave him a brutal thrust that tumbled him over flat on his stomach.

Kneeling, Cobb planted a sturdy knee in the small of his back, holding him pinned.

`` Okay, Stevens.

I've drawn his fangs '', he snapped.

`` Go through his pockets, will you??

If we have to we'll take him apart and see what he's made of ''!!

Complying methodically, Pat pulled pocket after pocket inside out without finding a thing.

Cobb watched this with hunted eyes, his desperate hope waning by the moment.

Stevens was grunting over the last empty pocket when Russ abruptly rose and lunged toward Carmer's hat, which had tumbled half-a-dozen feet away when he first fell.

Cobb got it.

Straightening up, his eyes ablaze, he held out the battered Stetson.

`` Look at this ''!!

Inside the crown, stuffed behind the stained sweatband, could be seen thin, crumpled wads of currency.

Carmer's ingenious cache for his loot had been found.

`` By golly, Stevens!!

You were right '', Russ exclaimed, tearing the loose bills out of Carmer's hat.

`` That is, if we can be sure this is Colcord's money '' --

Pat grunted.

`` Where else would he get it??

Count what you've got there, Cobb.

We can soon tell ''.

Russ ran through the bills and named an amount it was highly unlikely any cowpuncher would come by honestly.

Pat nodded.

`` It's within a hundred of what Crip had '', he declared.

`` We know Penny spent some -- and Carmer must have dropped a few dollars getting that load on ''.

Handing the money over, Russ wiped his hands on his pants-legs as if ridding himself of something unclean.

His glance at Gyp Carmer was disdainful.

`` Shall we get out of here ''??

Leaving the card room, they moved back through the Palace the way they had come.

Glowering looks met them in the bar, but there was no attempt to halt them.

Pausing in the outside door to glance behind him, Pat looked his unspoken warning and stepped out.

He and Cobb clattered down the high steps to the street.

Neither spoke till they reached their horses.

Pat paused there, looking across at the young fellow.

It'll be a pleasure for you to return this money to Colcord and tell him about it, Russ ''.

He started to return it.

To his faint surprise Russ held up his hand.

`` Not me '', he ruled decidedly.

I've had enough.

It was you that tracked it down anyway, Stevens '', he pursued strictly.

`` I'll shove along home ''.

`` Whatever you say ''.

Pat swung into the saddle, yet still he delayed, his brows puckered.

`` You owe it to Penny to give her a chance to explain that she was defending you, really '', he observed mildly.

`` Old Crip wasn't '', retorted Cobb tartly.

`` He'll know when you tell him.

But I want this to sink in awhile.

Then maybe next time he won't be so quick on the trigger ''.

`` Pat had never pretended to give advice in such affairs.

`` You're the doctor '', he returned with a smile.

`` But I still think Penny's an awful nice girl, Russ '' --

`` You don't have to tell me '', flashed Cobb.

Giving the other a dark look, he hauled his bronc around and trotted down off the street.

Pat let him go, following more leisurely.

At the first restaurant he sensibly pulled up to go in for his dinner, and as a consequence did not see Cobb strike the open range at the mouth of the canyon and head straight across the swells for Antler.

The truth was, the puncher was both bewildered and dismayed by his own mixed luck.

`` Penny's always glad to see me over there '', he mused bleakly.

Yet had he not visited the girl at Saw Buck he would never have been involved in this latest tangle.

Over and above that, however, was his growing suspicion of Chuck Stober's part in recent events.

`` Gyp Carmer couldn't have known about Colcord's money unless he was told -- and who else would have told him ''??

He asked himself.

`` It's the second time War Ax hands made a play for that money.

How much of an accident could that be ''??

Nearing home, he jerked to attention at the distant crack of a gun.

In town no one paid much attention to an occasional shot;;

but on the range gunfire had a meaning.

Hauling up, Russ listened carefully.

Two minutes later it came again -- a double explosion, followed by a third, sounding more distant.

As near as Cobb could determine the shots came from the direction of the Antler ranch house.

He tightened up in a twinkling.

So far as he knew, only his father could be there.

What did it mean??

Clapping spurs to the bronc he set off at a sharp canter, with growing alarm.

His first glimpse of the ranch house across the brushy swells told him nothing.

Still a quarter-mile away, the fresh clap of guns only served to increase his speed.

Setting a course straight for the house, he was covering ground fast when an angry bee buzzed past close to his face.

When it was followed by a second, whining even closer, Cobb swerved sharply aside into a depression.

He knew now what he was up against.

Whoever was out there hiding in the brushy cover was besieging the Antler house and, having spotted his approach, was determined to drive him off before he could get into the fight.

Cursing himself for having ridden out the last few days without a rifle in his saddle boot, Russ drew his Colt and examined it briefly.

If he wondered whether the attackers would allow him to pull away unmolested, he had his answer a moment later.

`` Over this way!!

He ain't gone far ''!!

A harsh cry floated to him across the brush.

A carbine cracked more loudly, and a slug clipped fragments from the brush off at one side.

The would-be assassin had his position figured pretty close.

Dismounting, Russ looked about hastily.

Toward the west this depression led toward a draw.

Leading his pony, he hurried that way, not remounting till he was well below the level of the surrounding range.

Swinging up then, and bending forward over the horn, he urged his mount down the meandering draw.

He had not covered a hundred yards before a gun crashed from somewhere behind.

He had been sighted, and his attacker pumping shot after shot.

A shot or two went wild before Cobb felt something tug at his foot.

A slug had torn half of his stirrup-guard away.

A second twitched his shirtsleeve, and he felt a brief burn on his upper arm.

Another snarled close overhead.

`` Jumping Jerusalem!!

Let's get out of here ''!!

At the first shot Russ had hurled his mount to the left toward the side of the winding draw.

The long minute before he reached effective cover seemed endless.

Sweeping a look around, he saw that he was safe for the moment.

He heard cries from behind him, but he could make out no words.

He dashed madly for the next elbow turn in the draw, and made it.

Recklessly hurling the bronc sidewise into an intersecting draw, he plunged forward with undiminished speed.

Gradually the wash climbed upward, forcing him toward open range.

Yet he must chance it.

He clambered out of the dwindling wash, the loose dirt flying behind him, and flashed a look about.

Early in November the clouds lifted enough to carry out the assigned missions.

And Sweeney Squadron put its first marks on the combat record.

Every plane that could fly was sent into the air.

Cricket took eight ships and went south across the Straits and along the north coast of Mindanao to Cagayan.

Anything the enemy flew or floated was his target.

Fleischman with eight was to patrol the Leyte Gulf area, with his main task to get any kamikaze before they got to the ships.

Greg himself took two flights, with Todman leading the second, to patrol and look for targets of opportunities around Ormoc on the east coast of Leyte.

Each plane carried two five-hundred pound bombs.

A weapons carrier took Greg, Todman, Belton, Banjo Ferguson, and Walters and the others the two miles from the bivouac area to the strip.

It was a rough long ride through the mud and pot holes.

No one had much to say.

The sky glowered down at them.

There was a feeling that this mission would be canceled like all the others and that this muddy wet dark world of combat would go on forever.

The truck dropped them off at the various revetments spread through the jungle.

Donovan snatched Greg's chute from him with a belligerent motion and almost ran to the plane with it.

His face was dark as the sky above it as he stood on the wing and waited for his pilot.

Greg climbed into the cockpit feeling as if he had never been in one before.

But his hands and those of Donovan moved automatically adjusting and arranging in the check-out procedure.

`` I've got her as neat as I can '', Donovan said, as he dropped the straps of the Seton harness over Greg's shoulders.

`` But this goddamn climate.

It's for carabao not airplanes ''.

`` We'll make out.

Don't you worry, chief '', Greg replied, wondering if he himself believed it.

`` Yeah.

See you '', Donovan said as he jumped off the wing.

The expression was his trade-mark, his open sesame to good luck, and his prayer that pilot and plane would always return.

At the prearranged time, Greg started the engine and taxied out.

From the time the chocks were pulled until the plane was out of sight, he knew Donovan would keep his back to the strip.

He wondered where the superstition had originated that it was bad luck for a crew chief to watch his plane take off on a combat mission.

Yet long before the scheduled time for return, Donovan would be watching for every speck in the sky.

Greg rumbled down the rough metal taxi strip, and one by one the seven members of his flight fell in behind him.

The dark brown bombs hanging under each wing looked large and powerful.

The pilots' heads looked ridiculously small.

The control tower gave him immediate take-off permission, and the clean roar of the engine that took him off the rough strip spoke well of the skill of Donovan.

Greg's mission was the last to leave, and as he circled the ships off Tacloban he saw the clouds were dropping down again.

To the west, the dark green hills of Leyte were lost in the clouds about halfway up their slopes.

Underneath him the sea was a dark and muddied gray.

Water splashed against his windshield as he led the flight in and out of showers.

The metal strip they had taken off from was coal black against the green jungle around it.

He possessed the fighter pilot's horror of bad weather and instrument flying, and he wondered, if the ceiling did drop, whether he and the other flights would be able to find their way back in this unfamiliar territory.

He shivered in the warm cockpit.

The overcast was solid above him.

As far as he could see there was no hole to climb through it.

They would have to go west through the narrow river valley that separated Leyte from Samar and hope that it didn't close in before they returned.

Greg pushed the radio button on his throttle.

`` Todman, let's try to go under this stuff.

Stay in close and we'll go up the valley ''.

`` Roger, Sweeney '', Todman called back, and pulled his four in and slightly above Greg.

Greg took the formation wide around three A-26 attack bombers that were headed north over the Gulf.

He dropped down to five hundred feet, swinging a little north of the city of Tacloban, and punched into the opening that showed against the mountain.

The valley was only a few hundred yards wide with just about room enough for a properly performed hundred-and-eighty-degree turn.

It was only a fifteen-minute flight, but before it was through Greg felt himself developing a case of claustrophobia.

The ceiling stayed solid above them at about eight hundred feet, and at times the sheer cliffs seemed about to close in.

If the other pilots were worried, they did not show it.

The formation remained perfect.

When the sea was visible ahead of them, the relief was as great as if the sun had come out.

He spread the flight out and led them across a point of land and then down the coast.

Although they drew light ground fire they saw no signs of activity.

Once Todman thought he had spotted a tank and went down to investigate while Greg covered him.

`` Somebody beat us to it ''!!

Todman said over the radio as he came back up in formation.

Visibility continued to be limited, and Greg was never able to get above a thousand feet.

It was frustrating.

His earphones were constantly full of the sounds of enemy contacts made by other flights.

He thought once that he identified the somewhat hysterical voice of Fleischman claiming a kill.

But Greg's area remained as placid as a Florida dawn.

Finally, as time began to run out, he headed into Ormoc and glide-bombed a group of houses that Intelligence had thought might contain Japanese supplies.

The low clouds made bombing difficult.

There was not enough room to make the usual vertical bomb run.

The accuracy was deplorable.

One of Greg's bombs hung up, and he was miles from the target before he could get rid of it.

Only one of the flight scored a direct hit and the rest blew up jungle.

With their load of bombs gone, the planes moved swiftly and easily.

Greg went up tight against the ceiling and led them back to their pass to home.

Mercifully, it was still open.

Like a man making a deep dive, Greg took full breath and plunged back into the valley.

He was about to make a gas check on his flight when Todman's voice broke in: `` Sweeneys!!

Three bogies.

Twelve o'clock level ''.

Greg's eyes flicked up from his instrument panel.

He saw them, specks against the gray, but closing fast.

They were headed straight for each other on a collision course.

Friend or enemy??

The same old question.

And only a few seconds to answer it.

`` Zeros ''!!

Todman said excitedly, and hopefully.

And then he thought Todman might be right.

His mind flicked through the mental pictures he had from the hours of Aircraft Identification.

He narrowed the shape down to two: either a Zero or a U. S. Navy type aircraft.

If it were the enemy, tactically his position was correct.

Japanese aircraft were strong on maneuverability, American on speed and firepower.

His present maximum altitude, up against the overcast, gave him the opportunity to exploit his advantages.

But it also made him conspicuous to the enemy, if it was the enemy, and he hadn't been spotted already.

But the closing aircraft showed no sign of deviating from their original course.

In seconds, Greg made his decision.

He pushed the radio button.

`` Sweeney Blue, hit the deck.

Lots of throttle.

Todman, you take the one on the left.

I'll take the middle.

Belton, the one on the right.

If they're Japs.

Let's make sure first ''.

Greg had the stick forward and the throttle up before he heard the two `` Rogers ''.

The planes, light with most of the gas burned out, responded beautifully.

Greg's airspeed indicator was over 350 when he leveled off just above the trees.

The opposing aircraft continued to come on.

They appeared to be the enemy.

Greg wished the Air Corps had continued to camouflage planes.

There was, of course, no way for the other planes to get by them.

It was a box.

But they could turn and escape to the east.

Greg pushed the radio button again.

`` Todman, drop your second element back.

If any of us miss, they can pick up the pieces.

Now let's make sure they're Japs ''.

Even as he said it, Greg knew they had found the enemy.

The shapes were unmistakable and the Rising Suns were showing up, slightly brighter pinpoints in the gray gloom.

Greg slapped his hand across the switches that turned on the guns and gun camera and gun sight.

The circle with the dot in the center showed up yellow on the reflector glass in front of him.

His hands shook.

`` Arm your guns, Sweeneys ''.

`` They're Japs.

They're Japs '', came a high-pitched voice.

`` Greg to Sweeney Blue.

One pass only.

No turns.

You'll bust your ass in this canyon.

That's an order ''.

He moved the flights over against one wall.

It gave them all a chance to make a high-speed climbing turn attack and a break-away that would not take them into the overcast or force a tight-turn recovery.

If the turn was too tight, a barrel roll would bring them out.

A hell of an altitude for a barrel roll, but it could be done.

Greg slammed his throttle to the fire wall and rammed up the RPM, and the engine responded as if it had been waiting.

The clearly identifiable enemy continued on as if no one else were around.

`` They haven't seen us '', Greg yelled to himself over the engine noise.

`` They haven't seen us ''.

He hit the radio button.

`` Now, Sweeneys, now.

Let's take 'em home ''.

He hauled back on the stick and felt his cheeks sag.

Out of the corner of his eye, he watched his wingman move out a bit and shoot up with him.

Perfect, he thought.

With the rapid rate of closure, the approach from below, the side, and ahead, there would be only a moment when damage could be done.

Just like shooting at a duck while performing a half-gainer from a diving board.

He tightened his turn.

His nose up.

It was going to be dangerous.

Eight aircraft in this small box.

Please, dear God, make my pilots good, he prayed.

He took a lead on the enemy, using a distance of five of the radii in his circular sight and then added another.

The enemy did not veer.

It did not seem possible that they hadn't been spotted.

Blind fools.

Now!!

Greg's fingers closed on the stick trigger.

The plane rumbled and slowed.

Six red lines etched their way into the gray and vanished.

As if drawn by a wire the enemy flew into them.

Greg tightened his turn until the plane shuddered.

Luck was with him.

His burst held for a second on the engine section of the plane.

The Jap's propeller flew off in pieces.

A large piece of engine cowling vanished.

It was all Greg had time to see.

His maneuvering for the shot had placed him near the overcast, almost inverted and heading up into the clouds.

His speed was dropping rapidly.

If he spun out now, he would join his opponent on the ground.

Wingman, stay clear, he prayed.

He pushed stick and rudder and entered the overcast on his back.

He fought the panic of vertigo.

He had no idea which was up and which was down.

He held the controls where they had been.

Sweat popped out over him and he felt the slick between his palm and the stick grip.

His air speed dropped until he thought he would spin out.

Over the rattling of fenders, humming of tires and chattering of gears there was a charming melody of whispers and tiny giggles.

Cool air moving slowly through the open or smashed-out side windows hinted of blooming roadside vegetation, and occasionally a faint fragrance of perfume swirled from the back seat.

`` Moriarty '', my driver suddenly exclaimed with something so definite, so final in his tone I once more repeated the absurdity, mustering all my latent powers of hypocrisy to sound convinced.

We were coming to an intersection, turning right, chuffing to a stop.

Forced to realize that this was the end of a very short line I scanned a road marker and discovered what the end of a slightly longer line would be for the old Mexican: Moriarty, New Mexico.

`` Gracias.

Adios '', I said, exhausting my Spanish vocabulary on my host and exchanging one of a scarcely-tapped store of smiles with my host's daughters.

I waved with discretion and moderation to the vague golden faces fading through rising dust and the distortions of the back window glass.

Then I saw the father's head slightly turn;;

gauche rainbow shapes replaced the poignant ovals of gold.

Autos whizzed past.

White-shirted and conservatively-cravated drivers stared conspicuously toward the eastern horizon and past my supplicating and accusing gaze.

Suddenly a treble auto horn tootley-toot-tootled, and, thumbing hopefully, I saw emergent in windshield flash: red lips, streaming silk of blonde hair and -- ah, trembling confusion of hope, apprehension, despair -- the leering face of old Herry.

`` Mor-ee-air-teeeee '', he shrieked, his white teeth grossly counterpointing those of the glittering blonde.

Over the rapidly-diminishing outline of a jump seat piled high with luggage Herry's black brushcut was just discernible, near, or enviably near that spot where -- hidden -- more delicately-textured, most beautifully tinted hair must still be streaming back in cool, oh cool wind sweetly perfumed with sagebrush and yucca flowers and engine fumes.

Damn his luck.

I would have foregone my romantic chances rather than leave a friend sweltering and dusty and -- Well, at least I wouldn't have shouted back a taunt.

Still nursing anger I listlessly thumbed a car that was slowly approaching, its pre-war chrome nearly blinding me.

It was stopping.

Just as I straightened up with my duffel bag, I heard: `` Sahjunt Yoorick, meet Mrs. Major J. A. Roebuck ''.

The voice was that of Johnson, tail gunner off another crew.

Squeezing a look between Johnson's fat jowls and the car frame a handsome and still darkhaired lady inquired `` Y'all drahve ''??

I nodded.

`` Onleh one thiihng '', Mrs. Roebuck continued.

`` Ahm goin nawth t'jawn mah husbun in Sante Fe, an y'all maht prefuh the suhthuhn rewt.

But Corporal Johnson has alreadeh said it didn make no diffrunce t'hi-im ''.

I said that it didn't make any difference to me either, as far as I knew.

How far I knew will shortly become apparent.

Let me pass over the trip to Sante Fe with something of the same speed which made Mrs. Roebuck `` wonduh if the wahtahm speed limit ''( 35 m.p.h.) `` is still in ee-faket ''.

I let up on the accelerator, only to gradually reach again the 60 m.p.h. which would, I hoped, overhaul Herry and the blonde, and as there were cars whose drivers apparently had something more important to catch than had I, Mrs. Major Roebuck settled down to practicing on Corporal Johnson the kittenish wiles she would need when making her duty call on Colonel and Mrs. Somebody in Sante Fe.

When Johnson ejaculated `` Howsabout my buying us all a nice cold Co-cola, Ma'am ''??

Mrs. Roebuck smilingly declined and began suddenly to go on about her son, who was `` onleh a little younguh than you bawhs ''.

Johnson never would have believed she had a son that age.

Mrs. Roebuck thought Johnson was a `` sweet bawh t'lah lahk thet '', but her Herman was getting to be a man, there was no getting around it.

`` Just befoh he left foh his academeh we wuh hevin dack-rihs on the vuhranduh, Major Roebuck an Ah, an Huhmun says' May Ah hev one too'??

Just as p'lite an -- an cohnfidunt, an Ah says' Uh coahse you cain't', but he says' Whah nawt, you ah hevin one'??

An Ah coudn ansuh him an so Ah said' Aw right, Ah gay-ess, an his fathuh didn uttuh one wohd an aftuh Huhmun was gone, the majuh laughed an tole me thet he an the bawh had been hevin an occasional drink t'gethuh f'ovuh a yeah, onleh an occasional one, but just the same it was behahn mah back, an Ah doan think thet's nahce at all, d'you ''??

`` No, I don't '', Johnson said.

`` I'm a good Baptist, and drinking ''

Mrs. Roebuck very kindly let me drive through Sante Fe to a road which would, she said, lead us to Taos and then Raton and `` eventshahleh '' out of New Mexico.

How lightly her `` eventshah-leh '' passed into the crannies where I was storing dialect material for some vaguely dreamed opus, and how the word would echo.

And re-echo.

Hardly had Mrs. Roebuck driven off when a rusty pick-up truck, father or grandfather of Senor `` Moriarty's '' Ford sedan, came screeching to a dust-swirling stop, and a brown face appeared, its nose threatened by shards of what had once been the side window.

`` Get in, buddies.

Get in ''.

The straight, black hair flopped in a vigorous nod, the slender nose plunged toward glass teeth and drew safely back.

Johnson unwired the right hand door, whose window was, like the left one, merely loosely-taped fragments of glass, and Johnson wadded himself into a narrow seat made still more narrow by three cases of beer.

`` In back, buddy '', the driver said to me.

Quickly but carefully lowering my duffel bag over the low side-rack, I stepped on the running board;;

it flopped down, sprang back up and gouged my shin.

The truck was hurtling forward.

I seized the rack and made a western-style flying-mount just in time, one of my knees mercifully landing on my duffel bag -- and merely wrecking my camera, I was to discover later -- my other knee landing on the slivery truck floor boards and -- but this is no medical report.

I was again in motion and at a speed which belied the truck's similarity to Senor X's Ford turtle.

Maybe I would beat old Herry to Siberia after all.

Whatever satisfaction that might offer.

Something pulled my leg.

I drew back, drawing back my foot for a kick.

But it was only Johnson reaching around the wire chicken fencing, which half covered the truck cab's glassless rear window.

The way his red rubber lips were stretched across his pearly little teeth I thought he was only having a little joke, but, no, he wanted me to bend down from the roar of wind so he could roar something into my ear.

`` Wanna beer ''??

`` Hell, yes '', I roared back between dusty lips.

Did I want a beer??

Did an anteater want ants??

`` Bueno, amigo.

Gracias '', I hollered, my first long swallow filling me with confidence and immediately doubling the size of my Spanish vocabulary.

At once my ears were drowned by a flow of what I took to be Spanish, but -- the driver's white teeth flashing at me, the road wildly veering beyond his glistening hair, beyond his gesticulating bottle -- it could have been the purest Oxford English I was half hearing;;

I wouldn't have known the difference.

Johnson was trying to grab the wheel, though the swerve of the truck was throwing him away from it.

White teeth suddenly vanishing, the driver slammed the side of his bottle against Johnson's ear.

We were off the road, gleaming barbed wire pulling taut.

I ducked just as the first strand broke somewhere down the line and came whipping over the sideboards.

We were in a field, in a tight, screeching turn.

Prairie dogs were popping up and popping down.

When I fell on my back, I saw a vulture hovering.

Just as I got to my knees, there was again the sound of the fence stretching, and I had time only to start taking my kneeling posture seriously.

This time no wire came whipping into the truck.

We were back on the road.

I regained my squatting position behind the truck cab's rear window.

Johnson's left hand was pressed against the side of his head, red cheeks whitening beneath his fingers.

`` Tee-wah '', the driver cackled, his black eyes glittering behind dull silver chicken fencing.

`` That was Tee-wah I was talking.

You thought I was a Mexican, didn't you, buddy ''??

I nodded.

`` Hell, that's all right, buddy '', the Indian( I now guessed) said.

`` Drink your beer ''.

Miraculously, the bottle was still in my hand, foam still geysering over my( luckily) waterproof watch.

No sooner had I started drinking than the driver started zigzagging the truck.

The beer foamed furiously.

I drank furiously.

A long time.

Emptied the bottle.

Teeth again flashing back at me, the driver released a deluge of Spanish in which `` amigo '' appeared every so often like an island in the stormy waves of surrounding sound.

I bobbed my head each time it appeared.

Suddenly the Spanish became an English in which only one word emerged with clarity and precision, `` son of a bitch '', sometimes hyphenated by vicious jabs of a beer bottle into Johnson's quivering ribs.

A big car was approaching, its chrome teeth grinning.

Beyond it the gray road stretched a long, long way.

The car was just about to us, its driver's fat, solemn face intent on the road ahead, on business, on a family in Sante Fe -- on anything but an old pick-up truck in which two human beings desperately needed rescue.

I tossed the bottle.

High, so it would only bounce harmlessly but loudly off the car's steel roof.

Too high.

On unoccupied roadway the bottle shattered into a small amber flash.

`` Aye-yah-ah-ah ''!!

The Indian was again raising his bottle, but to my astonished relief -- probably only a fraction of Johnson's -- the bottle this time went to the Indian's lips.

Another car was coming, a tiny, dark shape on a far hill.

I started looking on the splintery truck bed for a piece of board, a dirt clod -- anything I could throw and with better aim than I had thrown the beer bottle.

We were slowing.

In the ditch sand was white and soft-looking, only an occasional pebble discernible, faintly gleaming.

But Johnson couldn't quickly unwire the truck door, and if I escaped, he might suffer.

The car was approaching fast.

On the truck bed there was nothing smaller than a piece of rusty machinery;;

with more time I could have loosened a small burr or cotter pin --

Suddenly and not a second too soon I thought of the coins in my pocket.

There was no time to pick out a penny;;

I got a coin between my thumb and forefinger, leaned my elbows in a very natural and casual manner on top of the truck cab and flipped my little missile.

There was a blur just under my focus of vision, a crash;;

the car's far windshield panel turned into a silver web with a dark hole in the center.

I heard the screech of brakes behind me, an insane burst of laughter beneath me.

Looking back I saw a gray-haired man getting out of his halted car and trying to read our license number.

`` S-s-sahjunt ''.

Johnson's fat hand, another bottle were protruding from the truck cab, and that self-proclaimed Baptist teetotaler, had a bottle at his own lips.

Two cars came over a crest, their chrome and glass flashing.

The Indian's arm whipped sidewise -- there was a flash of amber and froth, the crash of the bottle shattering against the side of the first car.

Brakes shrieked behind us.

I saw Johnson's bottle snatched from his hand, saw it go in a swirl of foam just behind the second car.

This time there was no sound of brakes but the shrieking of women.

I looked back at pale ovals framed in the elongated oval of the car's rear window.

`` Drink, you son of a bitch ''!!

I quickly turned around and began to drink.

But the Indian was jabbing another bottle toward Johnson.

I guided her to the divan, turned off the TV, faced her.

She sat quietly, staring at me from the wide eyes.

And what eyes they were.

Big and dark, a melting, golden brown.

Eyes like hot honey, eyes that sizzled.

Plus flawless skin, smooth brow and cheeks, lips that looked as if you could get a shock from them.

It was a disturbingly familiar face, too, but I couldn't remember where we had met.

I said, `` Do we know each other, Miss ''??

`` No, I remembered reading about you in the papers and that you lived here, and when it happened all I could think of was '' -- This time she stopped the rush of words herself.

`` I'm sorry.

Shall I go on ''??

She smiled.

It was her first smile.

But worth waiting for.

`` Sure ''.

I said.

`` But one word at a time, O.K. ''??

She was still hugging the stained coat around her, so I said, `` Relax, let me take your things.

Would you like a drink, or coffee ''??

`` No, thanks ''.

She stood up, pulled the coat from her shoulders and started to slide it off, then let out a high-pitched scream and I let out a low-pitched, wobbling sound like a muffler blowing out.

She was wearing nothing beneath the coat.

She jerked the coat back on and squeezed it around her again, but not soon enough.

There had been a good second or two during which my muffler had been blowing out, and now I was certain I'd seen her somewhere before.

`` I forgot ''!!

She yelped.

`` Oh, do forgive me.

I'm sorry ''!!

`` I forgive '' --

`` That's what started all the trouble in the first place.

Oh, dear, I'm all unstrung ''.

`` You and me both, dear.

Haven't we haven't I seen you.

I mean, surely we've '' --

`` You may have seen me on TV '', she said.

`` I've done several filmed commercials for '' --

Then it hit me.

`` Zing ''!!

I cried.

`` Why, yes.

And you recognized me ''??

`` Yes, indeed.

In fact, I was watching you on that little seventeen-inch screen when you rang my bell.

Man, you rang -- it was in color, too, Miss, and Miss??

What's your name, anyway??

Ah, you were splendid ''.

I sat by her on the divan.

`` Splendid.

In a waterfall and all that ''.

`` That's the last one we did.

That was a fun one ''.

`` I'll bet.

It was fun for me, all right.

I don't mean to pry, but do they hide the swimsuit with the bubbles??

I mean: Is advertising honest??

`` It depends on who does it.

I never wear anything at all.

It wouldn't -- wouldn't seem fair, somehow ''.

`` I couldn't agree with you more ''.

`` I really do have something important to tell you, Mr. Scott.

About the murder ''.

`` Murder??

Oh, yeah '', I said.

`` Tell me about the murder ''.

She told me.

Zing was the creation of two men, Louis Thor and Bill Blake, partners in zing!!

, Inc..

They'd peddled the soap virtually alone, and without much success, until about a year ago, when -- with the addition of `` SX-21 '' to their secret formula and the inauguration of a high-powered advertising campaign -- sales had soared practically into orbit.

Their product had been endorsed by Good Housekeeping, the A.M.A., and the Veterinary Journal, among other repositories of higher wisdom, and before much longer if you didn't have a cake of their soap in the john, even your best friends would think you didn't bathe.

My lovely caller -- Joyce Holland was her name -- had previously done three filmed commercials for zing, and this evening, the fourth, a super production, had been filmed at the home of Louis Thor.

The water in Thor's big swimming pool had been covered with a blanket of thick, foamy soapsuds -- fashioned, of course, from zing -- Joyce had dived from the board into the pool, then swirled and cavorted in her luxurious `` bath '' while cameras rolled.

The finished -- and drastically cut -- product would begin with a hazy longshot of Joyce entering the suds, then bursting above the pool's surface clad in layers of lavender lather, and I had a hunch this item was going to sell tons and tons of soap;;

even to clean men and boys.

Joyce went on, `` When we'd finished, Lou -- Mr. Thor -- asked me to stay a little longer.

He wanted a few stills for magazine ads, he said.

Everybody left and I stayed in the pool, then Lou came back alone and leaped into the pool too.

And he didn't have any clothes on ''.

`` He didn't ''!!

`` Yes, he didn't.

Did, I mean ''.

She paused.

`` Did leap into the pool, and didn't have anything on.

Anyway, it was evident what he had in mind ''.

`` You got away, didn't you ''??

`` Yes.

He caught up with me once and grabbed me, but I was all covered with zing -- it's very slippery, you know ''.

`` I didn't know.

I wouldn't have the stuff in the house.

But I'm pleased to hear '' --

`` So I just scooted out of his clutches.

I swam like mad, got out of the pool, grabbed my robe, and ran to the car.

The keys were still in it, and I was miles away before I remembered that my clothes and purse and everything were still in the little cabana where I'd changed ''.

She'd driven around for a while, Joyce said, then, thinking Louis Thor would have calmed down by that time, she'd gone back to his home on Bryn Mawr Drive, parked in front, and walked toward the pool.

While several yards from it, still concealed by the shrubbery, she'd seen two men on her left at the pool's edge.

She went on:

`` A man was holding onto Lou, holding him up.

Maybe Lou was only unconscious, but right then I thought he must be dead.

The man shoved him into the water, then ran past the cabana.

There's a walk there that goes out to Quebec Drive.

I was so scared well, I just ran to my car and came here ''.

`` You know who the other man was ''??

`` No, I never did see his face.

I didn't get a good look at him at all, his back was to me, and I was so scared It was just somebody in a man's suit.

But I'm sure the other one was Lou ''.

What Joyce wanted me to do was go to Thor's house and `` do whatever detectives do '', and get her clothes -- and handbag containing her identification.

She realized I'd have to notify the police, but fervently hoped I could avoid mentioning her name.

Her impact in the zing commercials had led to her being considered for an excellent part in an upcoming TV series, Underwater Western Eye, a documentary-type show to be sponsored by Oatnut Grits.

But if Joyce got involved in murder or salacious scandal, the role would probably go to the sponsor's wife, Mrs. Oatnut Grits.

Or at least not to Joyce.

`` And I so want the part '', she said.

`` The commercials have just been for money, there hasn't been any real incentive for me to do them, but in Underwater Western Eye I'd have a chance to act.

I could show what I can do ''.

As far as I was concerned, she had already and had dandily shown what she could do.

But I promised Joyce I would mention her name, if at all, only as a last resort.

Seeming much relieved, she smiled one of those worth-waiting-for smiles, and I smiled all the way into the bedroom.

There I got my Colt Special and shoulder harness, slipped my coat on, and went back into the front room.

Joyce squirmed a little on the divan.

`` I'm starting to itch '', she said.

`` Itch ''??

`` Yes, I'm still all covered with that soap.

I was loaded with suds when I ran away, and I haven't had a chance to wash it off.

Mmmm, it sure itches ''.

`` You might as well wait here while I'm gone, so you can use my shower if you'd like ''.

`` Oh, I'd love to ''.

I showed her the shower and tub, and she said, smiling, `` If you really don't mind, I think I'll get clean in the shower, then soak for a few minutes in your tub.

That always relaxes me.

Doesn't it you ''??

`` Only when I do it ''.

I shook my head.

One of my virtues or vices is a sort of three-dimensional imagination complete with sound effects and glorious living color.

`` Soak as long as you want, Joyce.

It'll probably be at least an hour or two before I can check back with you.

So you'll have everything all to yourself, doggone ''

I looked at my watch.

Ten after nine.

Time to go, I supposed.

`` Well, goodbye '', I said.

`` Goodbye.

You'd better hurry ''.

`` Oh, you can count on that ''.

She smiled slightly.

Softly.

Warmly.

`` Don't hurry too much.

I'll be soaking for at least half an hour ''.

That was all she said.

But suddenly those hot-honey eyes seemed to have everything but swarms of bees in them.

However, when there's a job to be done, I'm a monstrosity of grim determination, I like to think.

I spun about and clattered through the front room to the door.

As I went out, I could hear water pouring in the shower.

Hot water.

She wouldn't be taking a cold shower.

Hell, she couldn't.

Bryn Mawr Drive is only two or three miles from the Spartan, and it took me less than five minutes to get there.

But the scene was not the quiet, calm scene I'd expected.

Four cars were parked at the curb, and two of them were police radio cars.

Lights blazed in the big house and surrounding grounds.

I followed a shrubbery-lined gravel path alongside the house to the pool.

Two uniformed officers, a couple of plain-clothesmen I knew, and two other men stood on a gray cement area next to the pool on my left.

At the pool's far end was the little cabana Joyce had mentioned, and on the water's surface floated scattered lavender patches of limp-looking lather.

A few yards beyond the group of men, a man's nude body lay face down on a patch of thick green dichondra.

Lieutenant Rawlins, one of the plain-clothesmen, spotted me and said, `` Hi, Shell '', and walked toward me.

`` How'd you hear about this one ''??

I grinned, but ignored the question.

He didn't push it;;

Rawlins worked out of Central Homicide and we'd been friends for years.

He filled me in.

A call to the police had been placed from here a couple of minutes after nine P.M., and the first police car had arrived two or three minutes after that -- 10 minutes ago now.

Present at the scene -- in addition to the dead man, who was indeed Louis Thor -- had been Thor's partner Bill Blake, and Antony Rose, an advertising agency executive who handled the zing account.

Neither of them, I understood, had been present at the filming session earlier.

`` What were they doing here ''??

I asked Rawlins.

`` They were supposed to meet Thor at nine PM for a conference concerning the ad campaign for their soap, a new angle based on this SX-21 stuff ''.

`` Yeah, I've heard more about SX-21 than space exploration lately.

What is the gunk ''??

`` How would I know??

It's a secret.

That was the new advertising angle -- something about a Lloyd's of London policy to insure the secrecy of the secret ingredient.

Actually, only two men know what the formula is, Blake and '' -- He stopped and looked at Thor's body.

I said, `` O.K., so now only Blake knows.

How's it strike you, foul or fair ''??

`` Can't say yet.

Deputy coroner says it looks like he sucked in a big pile of those thick suds and strangled on 'em.

The PM might show he drowned instead, but that's what the once-over-lightly gives us.

Accident, murder, suicide -- take your pick ''.

`` I'll pick murder.

Anything else ''??

`` According to Rose, he arrived here a couple minutes before nine and spotted Thor in the water, got a hooked pole from the pool-equipment locker and started hauling him out.

Too many people think that the primary purpose of a higher education is to help you make a living;;

this is not so, for education offers all kinds of dividends, including how to pull the wool over a husband's eyes while you are having an affair with his wife.

If it were not for an old professor who made me read the classics I would have been stymied on what to do, and now I understand why they are classics;;

those who wrote them knew people and what made people tick.

I worked for my Uncle( an Uncle by marriage so you will not think this has a mild undercurrent of incest) who ran one of those antique shops in New Orleans' Vieux Carre, the old French Quarter.

The arrangement I had with him was to work four hours a day.

The rest of the time I devoted to painting or to those other activities a young and healthy man just out of college finds interesting.

I had a one-room studio which overlooked an ancient courtyard filled with flowers and plants, blooming everlastingly in the southern sun.

I had come to New Orleans two years earlier after graduating college, partly because I loved the city and partly because there was quite a noted art colony there.

When my Uncle offered me a part-time job which would take care of my normal expenses and give me time to paint I accepted.

The arrangement turned out to be excellent.

I loved the city and I particularly loved the gaiety and spirit of Mardi Gras.

I had seen two of them and we would soon be in another city-wide, joyous celebration with romance in the air;;

and, when you took a walk you never knew what adventure or pair of sparkling eyes were waiting around the next corner.

The very faces of the people bore this expectation of fun and pleasure.

It was as if they could hardly wait to get into their costumes, cover their faces with masks and go adventuring.

My Uncle and I were not too close socially because of the difference in our ages.

Sometimes I wondered vaguely what he did about women for my Aunt, by blood, had died some years ago, but neither of us said anything.

One Monday morning I saw him approach the store with a woman and introduce me to her as my new Aunt.

They were married over the week-end, though he was easily sixty and she could not have been even thirty.

She looked more like twenty-five or six.

It was really a May and December combination.

My new Aunt was perhaps three or four years older than I and it had been a long time since I had seen as gorgeous a woman who oozed sex.

There was something about the contour of her face, her smile that was like New Orleans sunshine, the way she held her head, the way she walked -- there was scarcely anything she did which did not fascinate me.

Her legs were the full, sexy kind, full bodied like a rare wine and just as tantalizing to the appetite;;

the calf was magnificent, the ankle perfect.

You must forgive me if I seem to dwell too much on her physical aspects but I am an artist, accustomed to studying the physical body.

The true artist is like one of those scientists who, from a single bone can reconstruct an animal's entire body.

The artist looks at an ankle, a calf, a bosom and, in his mind's eye, the clothes drop away and he sees her as she really is.

And that is the way I first saw her when my Uncle brought her into his antique store.

That she impressed me instantly was obvious;;

I was aware that when our eyes met we both quickly averted them.

I thought I saw a faint surge of color rise to her neck and quickly suffuse her cheeks.

True, she was my Aunt, married to an Uncle related to me only by marriage, but why she had married a man twice her age, and more, perhaps, I did not know or much care.

She was standing with her back to the glass door.

Her form was silhouetted and with the strong light I could see the outlines of her body, a body that an artist or anyone else would have admired.

As it is in so many affairs of the heart, a man and a woman meet and something clicks.

Something clicked in this instance, but I treated her circumspectly and I felt that she knew it, for we both kept our distance.

When she appeared at the store to help out for a few hours even my looking at her was surreptitious lest my Uncle notice it.

And then I became aware that she, too, glanced at me surreptitiously.

I felt that her eyes were undressing me as if she were a painter and I a nude model.

I dismissed these feelings as wishful thinking but I could not get it out of my head that we had a strong physical attraction for one another and we both feared to dwell on it because of our relationship.

When our eyes met the air was filled with an unuttered message of `` Me, too ''.

You have probably experienced this.

It is nothing you can put your fingers on but the air suddenly fills with a high charge of electricity.

Why she married him I do not know.

I myself was fond of him but what a young woman half his age saw in him was a mystery to me.

He already had that slow pace that comes over the elderly, while she herself had all the signs of one who appreciates the joys of living.

Perhaps, with my Uncle, she found a measure of economic security that she needed;;

or maybe she liked men old enough to be her father;;

some women with father fixations do.

For several weeks we eyed one another almost like sparring partners, and then one day Uncle was slightly indisposed and stayed home;;

his bride opened the store.

I was waiting in front of it when she showed up and told me of my Uncle's indisposition.

Even as she was telling me about it I became aware of a give-away flush that suffused her neck and moved upwards to her cheeks, and subconsciously I realized that when she entered the store she did not switch on the lights.

The cavernous depth, cluttered with antiques, echoed to her hard heels as she walked directly to the office in the rear and took the seat at his desk.

She placed her palms, fingers outspread, on the desk in an odd gesture as if to say, `` Now, what next ''??

I was aware of a humid look in her eyes that told me the time was opportune.

There was little likelihood of any customers walking in at that hour.

I was standing beside her, watching the outspread palms and wondering about the old horsehair sofa against the wall on which he sometimes napped.

I bent and kissed the still pink neck and suddenly she jumped up, and her two arms encircled me in a bear-like crush.

Her mouth, which had been so much in my thoughts, was warm and moist and tender.

I heard her murmur, `` We'd better lock the door ''.

It did not take me long to slip the bolt securely and return to the rear and its couch.

When we opened the door again for business and switched on the lights she said:

`` He will not always be indisposed ''.

`` I know.

I was thinking about that.

How will we work it out ''??

`` I don't know '', she said.

`` You're the man.

You figure it out.

I've noticed the way you've been looking at me ever since we met ''.

`` I guess we both felt it ''.

I said.

`` I guess so '', she said.

`` But now what ''??

Even as I said it I realized that an education can be invaluable.

`` I know what we can do '', I said.

`` Tell him I made a pass at you ''.

She raised a protesting hand with a startled air.

`` What are you trying to do??

Get thrown out??

If I even hint at it do you think it will matter that you are his nephew -- and not even a blood nephew ''??

`` I don't want to be thrown out and I don't think I will.

I think I have a way so we can carry on without his suspecting us ''.

`` By telling him you are making passes at me ''??

She said incredulously.

`` When I was in college '', I grinned, `` I remember a poem I had to read in my lit class.

I don't even remember who wrote it but it was one of those 15th or 16th century poets.

In those days poems often told a story in verse and those boys had some corkers to tell;;

and now I think we can use the knowledge they passed on to us.

Tomorrow Mardi Gras opens officially.

A lot of people will roam the streets in costumes and masks, and having a ball.

There will be romance and flirtation.

If you tell him I made a pass at you he might think you misunderstood something I said or did, so instead of just telling him I made a pass, say I tried to date you and that you agreed so you could prove to him what a louse I really am.

We made a rendezvous tomorrow evening at nine on some street near Lake Ponchartrain.

And to prove what you tell him about me you suggest that he keep the date instead.

You are both the same size.

He could use your clothes for a costume and a heavy veil for a mask.

When I show up he will know you are a good wife to have told him about it ''.

`` But you '' -- she began.

`` Don't worry about me.

It will turn out all right ''.

`` I don't understand '', she insisted.

`` Are you trying to cut your throat ''??

`` No '', I chuckled, `` I'm just beginning to collect dividends on my investment in education ''.

As we expected, on the following day my Uncle was completely recovered and opened the store as usual at 10 in the morning.

I felt that he looked at me coldly and appraisingly and seemed to be uncertain what his attitude towards me should be, but he did not say one word which might indicate that he had been told of advances to his wife.

I quit work at my usual hour as if this day was no different from other days.

I heard subsequently that my Uncle and Aunt had dinner in a nearby restaurant in the French Quarter after which he went home to get into his costume to keep the date.

Shortly before nine I drove my jalopy to the street facing the Lake and parked the car in shadows far enough away from the rendezvous corner but near enough to keep the corner in clear view.

A few minutes later I saw my Uncle's car drive up and a woman's figure emerge and walk to the corner.

I must say the figure was well made up.

If it were not that I knew who it was I could have mistaken it for my Aunt so well did her clothes fit him.

In one hand he gripped firmly a parasol though there had been no indication of rain.

I suspected why he brought it along.

In the half darkness I approached cautiously, making sure he did not see me.

He was looking out on the dark waters of the Lake when I came upon him and without wasting words I smacked him hard across the face.

`` You cheap bitch ''!!

I exclaimed.

`` You cheap, no good, two-timing bitch!!

You get a good, loyal husband -- smack!!

-- and you fall for a pass by his own nephew!!

You should -- smack!!

-- be ashamed of yourself.

He had better write a postcard to Walter.

He opened the myth book again and there( along the margin next to Robert Graves' imaginative interpretation of the creation of the Dactyls from Rhea's fingertips) were the names of four Munich bars and Meredith Wilder's address.

The bars were marked as Walter had marked them in a small black book kept in a nearly secret drawer.

The code, which had probably something to do with sex or some other interest, Nicolas was determined to find out and put to use.

A card to Walter would get him an introduction to this Meredith, and that might be good for something.

Nicolas called on his muse, a line came back:

`` Squaresville, man, and all the palazzos are crummy Palasts ''.

That ought to draw a laugh, Nicolas reasoned, as he stored the line away on the wax tape that was his mind.

And indeed, his postcard did draw from Walter a letter recommending his friend, the poet Nicolas Manas, to his friend Meredith Wilder.

Five days later, on receiving it, Meredith sat drumming his dactyls on his writing table.

Dammit!!

He inwardly cried.

His hand was large and square and heavily tanned.

The voice crying in him was the voice of guilt.

His four weeks in Italy had turned into nearer three months.

He had returned to the pension a week ago.

Now, he was just in the late poems of Holderlin and therefore had most of the nineteenth century before him -- plus next semester's class preparation.

He was determined to spend an industrious summer.

Well, maybe Manas wouldn't call.

Meredith's fingers slowed and stopped over a line before him: Sie lacheln, die Schwarzen Hexen.

The menace of Manas gradually faded as Meredith asked himself should he translate it,' How the dark fates laughed'??

Or, more rhythmically,' The swarthy witches are laughing'??

And he missed the point that the swarthy witches might be laughing at him for hoping to escape Nicolas Manas.

But Nicolas, too, was being interrupted, that morning.

Not by the 11:00 sun which had spread a warmth around his spot of grass in the English Gardens and sent him off to sleep;;

but by a blond girl in a sweater and skirt who stood a few yards off and tenderly regarded him.

Should she wake him??

She didn't have the heart.

Her heart, her maternal feeling, in fact her being was too busy expressing itself, as quietly thrilled by this sight of her Nicolas curled asleep under a blanket, in a park like a scene from Poussin.

She was just not able to break the spell.

( Would she have been able to had she known that the blanket belonged to a young ballet dancer Nicolas had found his first night in one of Walter's marked bars??

Nicolas: `` Look, Nicolas doesn't go to bed with boys -- no sex, see??

So if all these beers was to get me in bed, man, you just spent a lot of money ''.

Ballet dancer: Protests, tears, and `` take what you want, Nicolas, I am a dancer, you are a poet, it is all beautiful ''.

To this meek conjugation Nicolas had replied, `` O.K. I can use this blanket.

And when you get off this job tonight, well, you can gimme something to eat ''.

And, as a matter of fact, Nicolas had slept in the park only part of one night, when he discovered that Munich's early mornings even in summer are laden with dew.

He had always known how to find a bed, and on his own terms.

He used the blanket for late morning naps when hosts of the night had gone off to jobs and proved reluctant to leave him in their small rooms with their few possessions.

Mary Jane Lerner knew none of this.

) Her Nicolas lay curled in the sun like a fawn, black hair falling over his eyes.

She was telling herself that this might just be her reward at the end of a long meaningful search for truth.

This was surely a reunion in art, it was all that poetry promised.

That long night with Nicolas and marijuana in Venice had opened her eyes.

His advice, his voice saying his poems, the fact that he had not so much as touched her -- on the contrary, he had put his head back and she had stroked his hair -- this was all new.

Her eyes had opened, she had caught a glimpse of a new faith.

The next day he was gone.

Mary Jane might not be the most intelligent woman, but she was one of the most determined.

Even so, it took her several days to force Walter to tell her Nicolas's whereabouts.

Packing a small suitcase, informing her husband whom she found in Harry's Bar that she was taking a train to Germany to get away for a while, patting his arm, refusing a drink, getting on the train -- all this had only taken her two hours.

She had arrived this morning and come straight to the English Gardens.

`` Dear girl '', Walter had finally said, `` he writes me that he is sleeping in the English Gardens ''.

`` How like him ''!!

Mary Jane had smilingly said.

`` His address '', Walter added, `` is that great foundling home, the American Express.

And I will greatly appreciate it if you will not tell your husband.

'' For the last half hour Mary Jane had criss-crossed half the length of the Gardens and, at last, come upon her knight.

His presence there, asleep in the grass, confirmed all that Mary Jane believed it was in his power to teach her: freedom from the tedium of needs such as hotels, the meaning of nature, how to live, simply, with the angels.

She set down her suitcase.

Should she wake him??

No.

Smiling, she sat down on the suitcase and waited and watched.

The sun grew hotter as it approached the midday.

Nicolas was dreaming he had his head pressed against the dashboard of a speeding car.

He began sweating.

In his dream he cried, `` Slow down, for Chrissake ''!!

He half woke and rolled over with his face in the cooler grass.

His nose was tickled.

He sneezed.

He blew his nose expertly between his fingers.

He spit.

He half sat up and scratched at the hair on his forehead and then, more vigorously, between his legs.

He belched, he stretched.

Mary Jane got up, quietly, and walked away.

Twenty minutes later she was at the desk of the Grafin's pension, her tears dried, signing a hotel form and asking for a bath.

Mary Jane belonged to a world acquainted with small attractive hotels and pensions in all the major and minor cities.

She had retreated to this world.

The Grafin, who was charmed by her, told her, `` Your sister who was here two years ago has quite dark hair.

Families are very interesting.

Nevertheless, there is no bath.

But a young American has a bath next to his room and I shall ask him if you might use it this once.

And then we shall see.

''( The Grafin was partial to the word shall.

)

Meredith was irritated when the Grafin knocked at his door and told him, `` She is a great beauty!!

Shall we allow her not to have a bath??

Actually, she is a sad beauty, I believe.

You shall see her at dinner ''.

Rather erotically he listened to the bath water running;;

when it stopped he began busily typing, sitting up in a virtuous way.

Before dinner, he shaved for the second time that day.

A thing he did not like doing, generally.

Singing into the mirror and his interested eyes, he was pleased to note, when he stripped for his own bath, that he still had the best part of his Italian sun tan.

He flexed his muscles for several minutes, got into the tub, and then grew self-conscious of splashing as he washed.

In the small gallery used as the guests' dining room, Meredith sat down at his place and, as always, began teasing the young waitress.

He was asking had it been she who left the love note in his sheets( she also served as maid) when he saw the Grafin followed by a stately blond girl approaching his table.

It would be literary license calculated to glamorize life to say that he, oh, dropped his napkin, so startled was he by Mary Jane's beauty.

Yet he did drop his badinage with the ordinary country girl as much in deference to the Grafin as acknowledgement that here, indeed, was something special.

Mary Jane had made very little effort.

Above a dark green skirt she wore a pale green cashmere sweater with, as he soon perceived, no brassiere beneath.

Her white blond hair was clean and brushed long straight down to her shoulders.

Perhaps her eyes were larger and more of a summer blue for all they had seen and wept that day.

She had touched her face, truly a noble and pure face, only with a lip salve which made her lips glisten but no redder than usual.

The result was grace and modesty.

As she was rather tired this evening, her simple `` Thank you for the use of your bath '' -- when she sat down opposite him -- spoken in a low voice, came across with coolnesses of intelligence and control.

Meredith began falling in love.

Soup: `` Only this morning '';;

veal cutlets: `` Oh, I couldn't possibly eat all this ''!!

;;

Wine: `` Then you were typing poems this afternoon ''??

;;

Fruit compote: `` If you think I would understand it '';;

a smile.

`` What a beautiful room.

Like as if it were built of books ''.

Having opened the windows onto the terrace, lit the fire, translated the motto, Meredith grinned and took down a little triplet of books bound together in old calfskin.

Opening these he brought out a schnapps bottle and small gold thimble-sized glasses hidden inside it.

`` I think the maids tipple in the afternoon ''.

`` Those sweet girls??

Oh you're joking.

It tastes a little like poppyseed.

What's its name??

Steinhager '' She whispered Steinhager to herself, several times, memorizing it.

`` Would you first read the poem aloud to me and then let me read it to myself ''??

Meredith's voice was always deep, with rough bass notes in it;;

in reading, on platforms, even in the large auditorium of the Y.M.H.A., Poetry Center nights, his voice was intimate, thoughtful, and a trifle shy.

His new poem, a love poem, told of a young husband leading his wife upstairs to the bedroom when the lights in the house have failed.

The husband points the steps out with his flashlight: `` Its white stare filling her pale eyes To the blind brim with appetite, Bleaching her hands that grazed my thighs And sent us from the table in surprise To let the dishes soak all night, ''( Mary Jane asked herself if Meredith was blushing at this line, or was it the fire??

) But he read on.

In the bedroom before the husband and wife find their way to the bed, the lights go on: `` In dull domestic radiance I watch her staring face, still blind, Start wincing in obedience To dirty waters, counters, pots and pans, Waiting below stairs, in her mind ''.

Mary Jane took the page from him and began reading it, moving her lips with the words.

`` Oh, it's that myth, about Orpheus and What is her name??

I can never pronounce it ''.

She repeated `` Eurydice ''.

The third time rather urgently.

But with her hand poem again.

She raised her face and nodded, `` It's sweet, and very sad ''.

They discussed the way people never tell each other the things on their minds.

They finished the small bottle of Steinhager.

She confessed she was unhappy, he asked was it her husband??

She began to explain, `` There was this poet, in Italy '' He interrupted, `` Please don't judge all poets ''.

They smiled.

At her door, two or three hours later, Mary Jane whispered, `` Everyone is asleep ''.

Kissing her he whispered, several times, `` Eurydice ''.

The third time rather urgently.

But with her hand softly on his cheek for a last moment, she closed the door and he went back down the hall and into his bed excited, expectant, and finally faintly grinning with the feel of her hand against his mouth.

They were west of the Sabine, but only God knew where.

For three days, their stolid oxen had plodded up a blazing valley as flat and featureless as a dead sea.

Molten glare singed their eyelids an angry crimson;;

suffocating air sapped their strength and strained their nerves to snapping;;

dust choked their throats and lay like acid in their lungs.

And the valley stretched endlessly out ahead, scorched and baked and writhing in its heat, until it vanished into the throbbing wall of fiery orange brown haze.

Ben Prime extended his high-stepped stride until he could lay his goad across the noses of the oxen.

`` Hoa-whup ''!!

He commanded from his raw throat, and felt the pain of movement in his cracked, black burned lips.

He removed his hat to let the trapped sweat cut rivulets through the dust film upon his gaunt face.

He spat.

The dust-thick saliva came from his mouth like balled cotton.

He moved back to the wheel and stood there blowing, grasping the top of a spoke to still the trembling of his played-out limbs.

The burning air dried his sweat-soaked clothes in salt-edged patches.

He cleared his throat and wet his lips.

As cheerfully as possible, he said, `` Well, I guess we could all do with a little drink ''.

He unlashed the dipper and drew water from a barrel.

They could no longer afford the luxury of the canvas sweat bag that cooled it by evaporation.

The water was warm and stale and had a brackish taste.

But it was water.

Thank the Lord, they still had water!!

He cleansed his mouth with a small quantity.

He took a long but carefully controlled draught.

He replenished the dipper and handed it to his young wife riding the hurricane deck.

She took it grudgingly, her dark eyes baleful as they met his.

She drank and pushed back her gingham bonnet to wet a kerchief and wipe her face.

She set the dipper on the edge of the deck, leaving it for him to stretch after it while she looked on scornfully.

`` What happens when there's no more water ''??

She asked smolderingly.

She was like charcoal, he thought -- dark, opaque, explosive.

Her thick hair was the color and texture of charcoal.

Her temper sparked like charcoal when it first lights up.

And all the time, she had the heat of hatred in her, like charcoal that is burning on its under side, but not visibly.

A ripple ran through the muscles of his jaws, but he kept control upon his voice.

`` There must be some water under there ''.

He tilted his homely face toward the dry bed of the river.

`` We can get it if we dig '', he said patiently.

`` And add fever to our troubles ''??

She scoffed.

`` Or do you want to see if I can stand fever, too ''??

`` We can boil it '', he said.

Her chin sharpened.

`` We're lost and burning up already '', she bit out tensely.

`` The tires are rattling on the wheels now.

They'll roll off in another day.

There was no valley like this on your map.

You don't even know where we're headed ''.

`` Hettie '', he said as gently as he could, `` we're still headed west.

Somewhere, we'll hit a trail ''.

`` Somewhere!!

'' She repeated.

`` Maybe in time to make a cross and dig our graves ''.

His wide mouth compressed.

In a way, he couldn't blame her.

He had picked out this pathless trail, instead of the common one, in a moment of romantic fancy, to give them privacy on their honeymoon.

It had been a mistake, but anything would have been a mistake, as it turned out.

It wasn't the roughness and crudity and discomfort of the trip that had frightened her.

She had hated the whole idea before they started.

Actually, she had hated him before she ever saw him.

It had been five days too late before he learned that she'd gone through the wedding ceremony in a semitrance of laudanum, administered by her mother.

The bitterness of their wedding night still ripped within him like an open wound.

She had jumped away from his shy touch like a cat confronted by a sidewinder.

He had left her inviolate, thinking familiarity would gentle her in time.

But each mile westward, she had hated him the deeper.

He stared at the dipper, turning it over and over in his wide, calloused hands.

`` I suppose '', he muttered, `` I can sell the outfit for enough to send you home to your folks, once we find a settlement ''.

`` Don't try to be noble ''!!

Her laugh was hard.

`` They wouldn't have sold me in the first place if there'd been food enough to go around ''.

He winced.

`` Hettie, they didn't sell you '', he said miserably.

`` They knew I was a good sharecrop farmer back in Carolina, but out West was a chance to build a real farm of our own.

They thought it would be a chance for you to make a life out where nobody will be thought any better than the next except for just what's inside of them.

Without money or property, what would you have had at Baton Rouge ''??

`` I might have starved, but at least I wouldn't be fried to a crisp and soaked with dirt ''!!

He darkened under his heavy burn.

His blue eyes sought the shimmering sea of haze ahead.

To his puzzlement, there suddenly was no haze.

The valley lay clear, and open to the eye, right up to the sharp-limbed line of gaunt, scoured hills that formed the horizon twenty miles ahead.

Then he noticed the clouds racing upon them -- heavy, ominous, leaden clouds that formed even as they sliced over the crests of the surrounding hills.

He had never seen clouds like them before, but he had the primitive feel of danger that gripped a man before a hurricane in Carolina.

He hollered hoarsely, `` Hang on ''!!

And goaded the oxen as he yelled.

He wanted to turn them, putting the wagon against the storm.

Too late, he realized that in turning, he had wheeled them onto a patch of sandy ground, instead of atop a grade or ridge.

He swung up over the wheel.

`` You had better get inside '', he warned her.

But she sat on in stubborn silence.

The clouds bulged downward and burst suddenly into a great black funnel.

Frozen, they stared at it whirling down the valley, gouging and spitting out boulders and chunks of earth like a starving hound dog cracking marrowbones.

The six-ton Conestoga began to whip and shake.

Their world turned black.

It was filled with dust and wind and sound and violence.

The heavens opened, pelting them with hail the size of walnuts.

And then came the water -- not rain, but solid sheets that sluiced down like water slopping from a bucket.

Walls of water rushed down the slopes and filled the hollows like the crests of flash floods.

Through the splash of the rising waters, they could hear the roar of the river as it raged through its canyon, gnashing big chunks out of the banks.

The jetting, frothing surface of the river reached the level of the runoff.

The dangerous current upon the prairie ceased, but the water stood and kept on rising.

They cringed under sodden covers, listening to the waves slop against the bottom.

The cloudburst cut off abruptly.

They were engulfed by the weird silence, broken only by the low, angry murmur of the river.

Then the darkness thinned, and there was light again, and then bright sunlight.

Beaten with fear and sound and wet and chill, they crawled to the hurricane deck and looked out haggardly at a world of water that reached clear to the surrounding hills.

The water level was higher than their hubs.

Only the heavy bones of the oxen kept them anchored.

There was no real sign of the river now, just a roiling, oily ribbon of liquid movement through muddy waters that reached everywhere.

Clumps of brush rode down the ribbon.

Now and then, the glistening side of a half-swamped object showed as it swept past.

The girl crawled out into the renewing warmth of the sunshine, hugging her shoulders and still trembling.

Her face was pale but set and her dark eyes smoldered with blame for Ben.

Out of compulsion to say something cheery, Ben Prime blurted, `` Well, we were lucky to be on soft ground when the first floodheads hit.

At least, the wheels dug in.

The soaking will put life back in the wagon, too ''.

His wife didn't give a sign she'd heard.

She was watching a tree ride wildly down that roiling current.

Somebody was riding the tree.

It raced closer and they could see a woman with white hair, sitting astride an upright branch.

She did not call out.

But as the tree passed, she lifted an arm in gesture of better luck and farewell.

They watched the tree until it twisted sharply on a bend.

It speared up into the air, then sinking back, the up-jutting branch turned slowly.

The pale blob of the woman disappeared.

`` There's the one who's lucky ''!!

The girl murmured harshly.

Ben's eyes strained with the bitter hurt, his homely face slashed with gray and crimson.

Then he took off his wet boots and dropped down into the water to talk with the beasts, needing their comfort more than they needed his.

It was nearly sundown and he went to the back of the wagon, half-swimming his way, for he was not a tall man.

He let down the tailgate and was knocked over by the sluice of water.

He sputtered back to his feet and scrambled madly to pull his bags of seed grain forward.

They were already swollen to bursting.

Of all their worldly belongings, next to the oxen and his gun, the seed grain had been the most treasured.

It was spoiled now for seed, and it would sour and mold in three days if they failed to find a place and fuel to dry it.

The oxen might as well enjoy it.

He examined the water marks on the iron tires when the animals were finished.

The waters lay muddy but placid, without a ripple of movement against the wheels;;

there was not a match-width of damp mark to show they were receding.

He doubted if a man could wade as far as the desolate, dry hills that rimmed the valley.

A terrible, numbing sense of futility swept over him.

He gripped the wheel hard to fight the despondency of defeat.

Then he noticed that the dry wood of the wheels had swollen.

The spokes were tight again, the iron tires gripped onto the wheels as if of one piece.

Hope surged within him.

He swung toward the front to give the news to Hettie, then stopped, barred from her by the vehemence of her blame and hate.

Still, he felt better.

A tight wagon meant so much.

He got a small fire started and put on bacon and coffee.

He poured the water off the sourdough and off the flour, salvaging the chunky, watery messes for biscuits of a sort.

Their jams and jellies had not suffered.

He found a jar of preserved tomatoes and one of eggs that they had meant to save.

Now he broke them open, hoping a good meal might lessen this depression crushing Hettie.

His long nose wiggled at the smells of frizzling bacon and heating java, but the fire was low, and he wanted to waste no time.

He furled the slashed sides of the canvas tarpaulins, leaving the ribs and wagon open.

He looked thoughtfully at his wife's trunk, holding her meager treasures.

He said hesitantly, `` Hettie, I don't figure your things got wet too much.

That's a good trunk.

If you want to get them aired ''

She said without turning her head, `` After that rain beating in atop the dust, there isn't a thing that won't be streaked ''.

He drew a long breath and opened the trunk and hung out her clothes and spoilables upon the wagon ribs.

Sulphur, oil, and copra make the kind of tinder any firebug dreams of.

I suppose a Lascar sailor had sneaked a cigarette in the hold and touched off the blaze.

Now, roaring up in great oily clouds of smoke and flames, the fierce heat quickly drove us to the stern where we huddled like suffocating sheep, not knowing what to do.

The lifeboats were stuck fast.

We couldn't budge them.

I heard a cry from a stoker as a pillar of flame leaped from a hatch and tongued the man's bare back.

He sprinted to the rail and leaped overboard into the shark-infested waters.

One especially bad detonation shook Lifeboat No. 3 which trembled violently in the davits.

Brassnose yelled: `` Come on, Sommers, Max step on it, we got a chance now.

Heave on those ropes;;

the boat's come unstuck ''.

We pulled and swore and yanked and wept, scraping our hands until they bled profusely.

The Bonaventure was quivering and lurching like an old spavined mare.

Her stern was down and a sharp list helped us to cut loose the lifeboat which dropped heavily into the water.

Brassnose, Max and I leaped into the sea and swam to the boat.

`` Let's get away fast '', said Brassnose, shaking water from his mop of bleached hair.

`` That tub is going to explode all at once ''.

Then the Bonaventure seemed to disintegrate with a roar of live steam, geysers of sparks and flames, and a dense cloud of black-and-orange smoke.

Dimly, we heard the voices of men in mortal agony but we couldn't go back into that inferno.

Already our leaky lifeboat was filled with five inches of water.

`` Sommers, you bale while we row '', Brassnose commanded.

As best as I could determine, we were some 700 miles west of New Guinea, in the Bismark Archipelago.

Three days previously, we had steamed past barren Rennell Island in the distance.

Now we peered anxiously for any speck of land in the Pacific, for this interminable bailing would have to stop soon.

There were gigantic blisters and rope burns on our hands;;

our muscles were hot wires of pain.

Brassnose was strangely silent.

The big man with the whitened hair murmured something: his words sounded as if they were in the Manu tongue, which I recognized, having studied the dialect in my Anthropology 6, class at the University of Chicago.

He then said something which struck a chord in my memory.

`` God help us if we're near the island of Eromonga.

We'd be in real trouble then.

I'd rather keep bailing -- or sink ''.

I was puzzled by the remark, then I recalled the voice of mild Professor Howard Griggs three years ago in a university lecture on primitive societies.

He had been speaking of this archipelago:

`` Even when the islands were under German mandate before World War 1,, Europeans gave Eromonga a wide berth.

The place is inhabited by several hundred warlike women who are anachronisms of the Twentieth Century -- stone age amazons who live in an all-female, matriarchal society which is self-sufficient ''.

I remembered, too, the jesting voice of a classmate, Bobby Pauson: `` But how do they reproduce, Dr. Griggs??

I'm sure that males have something to do with that process ''!!

There had been classroom guffaws which quickly subsided as Professor Griggs said dryly: `` I see your point, Pauson.

Of course, males play a role there, but believe me when I say you wouldn't enjoy yourself one bit on Eromonga.

Indeed, you wouldn't live long, for the females either drive the men they've seized from neighboring islands back to their boats after exploiting them for amatory purposes, or they destroy them by revolting but ingenious methods.

In fact, one important aspect of their very religion is the annihilation of men ''.

`` I think I know what you mean, Brassnose '', I said.

`` I know something about Eromonga.

Let's hope we come to a safer place ''.

But we didn't.

Three hours later, while we were bailing desperately, a dot of land came into view.

Foster Lukuklu Frayne made a sign over his heart with his two linked thumbs: I recognized it as an ancient Manu gesture intended to propitiate the Devil.

A half-hour passed;;

we had drifted closer.

In a voice so frightened as to seem not his own, the big bo'sun's mate quavered:

`` Tchalo!!

It is Eromonga -- look hard, you can see with your naked eye the wooden scaffolding on the cliff ''.

I squinted at the looming shoreline.

There was a wooden tower or derrick there, something like a ski jump;;

it was perhaps 80 feet high and had been artfully constructed of logs.

A fine example of engineering in a primitive society.

`` What is the scaffolding for, Brassnose ''??

He made a sound of despair deep in his throat.

It was embarrassing to see strapping, blonde Brassnose comport himself like a child who talks about bogeymen.

`` Aaa-ee!!

It is their tultul, the' jumping platform' of death.

It is the last of the three tests of manhood which the women impose, to discover if a male is worthy of survival there.

Often, I heard my uncles and cousins speak of it when I was a small boy growing up in Rabaul.

They had never seen a tultul but they had heard about it from their fathers ''.

Our lifeboat was filling rapidly and despite what I had heard of the inhabitants of Eromonga, I was glad to see a long and graceful outrigger manned by three bronzed girls glide out of a lagoon into the open sea and toward our craft.

I expected Brassnose -- as a man with a strain of Melanesian in his blood -- to speak to them.

But he had turned a sickly green and appeared tongue-tied or panicked.

So, I mustered my few words of the Manu dialect and said, `` We greet you in peace.

In ngandlu.

My friends and I come from a ship which was destroyed by fire.

We are thirsty and hungry;;

our sore and burned hands and arms need attention ''.

The girl in the prow of the outrigger turned a smile like a beacon on me.

I noted that her full breasts were bare and that she wore a garland of red pandanus fruit in her blue-black hair.

She said, `` My name is Songau and these girls are Ponkob and Piwen.

You are welcome to Eromonga.

My people await you on the shore.

You shall have food, water and rest ''.

Thirty minutes later, the outrigger grated on sand and other girls, waiting on shore, rushed forward to pull it up on the beach and make it fast with vine ropes to a large boulder.

I saw a dozen or so other outriggers moored there.

I looked.

All my rosy visions of rest and even pleasure on this island vanished at the sight.

There was a mound of bleached human bones and skulls at the base of the big wooden derrick.

Some had been there for years;;

others still had whitened shreds of decayed flesh sticking to them.

There was one object which sickened yet fascinated me.

This was also a corpse -- a male, judging from the coral arm bands, the tribal scars still discernible on the maggoty face, the painted bone of the warrior caste which still pierced the septum of the rotting nose.

The body may have been two or three weeks' dead.

I looked with revulsion at the legs.

They were shattered.

Many small bones protruded crazily from the shreds of flesh.

The man must have leaped to his death from the topmost rung of the tultul.

As if divining my thoughts, the girl Songau smiled warmly and said in the casual tone an American woman might use in describing her rose garden:

`` This is our tultul, a jumping platform, aku.

Later, you shall know it better.

Is it not well-made??

Our old one blew down in a storm at the time of the pokeneu festival fifteen moons ago.

It took thirty of our women almost six moons to build this one, which is higher and stronger than the old one.

We are very proud of it ''.

`` You have every right to be '', I replied gravely in the Manu dialect, but my attention was fixed on Brassnose, the biggest and strongest of us.

He looked as if he was going to keel over.

I felt a queasiness in my own stomach but it wouldn't do to show these girls that we were afraid.

Not so soon, anyway.

I clapped the big man with the bleached hair on his shoulder and said heartily, hoping it would make an impression on the women: `` This one is the maku Frayne.

He speaks your language too, for he is the grandson of a chieftain on Taui who made much magic and was strong and cunning.

The maku Frayne has inherited this strength from his grandfather ''.

This was the worst thing I could have said.

Brassnose turned a stricken face toward me and said brokenly, `` Sommers, you meddling Yank, you're a fool!!

They despise males who brag of their strength;;

they destroy such men with their damned tests.

You've ruined me, blast you ''!!

At first, I thought he was out of his head, talking wildly like this.

But a glance at Songau and the other women confirmed what Brassnose had blurted out.

The women's faces had hardened after my statement.

At a nod from Songau, four lithe and muscular girls darted to Frayne's side and seized him by the arms.

The man was an ox and he put up a creditable struggle;;

but four Eromonga women are more than a match for the strongest male that ever lived.

Besides, terror had sapped some of Frayne's vitality and will.

My last impression as they led him off to a stockade was of his pale face

.

In the Manu tongue, `` eromonga '' means manhood -- a quality which the women derisively toasted in weekly feasts at which great quantities of a brew like kava were imbibed.

In the hut to which I was assigned -- Max had his own quarters -- my food was brought to me by a wrinkled crone with bare drooping breasts who seemed to enjoy conversing with me in rudimentary phrases.

Her name was L'Turu and she told me many things.

For an anthropologist, loquacious old L'Turu was a mine of information.

Though I had a great dread of the island and felt I would never leave it alive, I eagerly wrote down everything she told me about its women.

( Her account was later confirmed by the Scobee-Frazier Expedition from the University of Manitoba in 1951.

)

From L'Turu, I heard that until about 1850 the people of this island -- which was about the size of Guam or smaller -- had been of both sexes, and that the normal family life of Melanesian tribes was observed here with minor variations.

But in the middle of the last century an island woman named `` Karipo '' seized a spear in the heat of an inter-tribal battle and rallied the women after their men had fled.

Miraculously, Karipo and her women had succeeded in driving a hundred invaders from the isle of Pamasu back to their war canoes, after considerable loss of life on both sides.

Karipo was something of a politician as well as a militarist.

She quickly exploited the exalted position she now occupied, by harassing the disorganized males and even putting many of them to death.

Within a decade or less, few men were left and a feminist society had sprung up.

`` Karipo was great goddess, told our mothers that men were not necessary except to father children '', the crone told me.

`` All men went away from here.

Those who stayed had to pass tests.

Few passed ''.

She cackled with mirth, showing the stumps of betel-stained teeth.

`` Karipo's women then named this place' Eromonga' -- manhood -- for just the strongest men could stay here.

Come, I show you ''.

The old woman arose stiffly and led me to a clearing where a small hut stood.

In the shade of a palm tree in front of the squalid dwelling I saw four figures in a semi-circle on the ground.

`` I guess he spent the morning getting himself all organized, then headed for home.

Maybe to beat up on his squaw ''.

Benson looked up and saw Ramey's long head tilt forward to rub his chin on the stiff edge of the overall bib.

Ramey reached out with the tire iron and dislodged a chunk of mud that was caked on the spare tire rack.

`` I'd like to know just which it is that those guys don't understand, the liquor or automobiles ''.

Somehow the thought of a simple man bewildered by things no one had ever really helped him understand moved the driver.

For a moment his hatred toward drunken or careless drivers softened.

Maybe the Indian wasn't too much at fault, Ramey thought.

Maybe he was only doing the best he knew how, like any of us.

Anyway, he doesn't deserve to lie there in the sun and be stared at.

`` Ever see yourself spread out on the pavement, Benny ''??

He said to his partner.

`` You mean dream ''??

`` Not exactly.

Just see it ''.

Benson grinned and flipped a rock with his thumb like a marble.

`` Nope, just you, all the time -- sometimes I think it's the only way I'll ever get a decent partner ''.

Ramey smiled but he thought to himself, I always see me too.

Never Benny.

Whenever he saw someone lying in the dirt, Ramey wondered what the person had been thinking and he would try out thoughts in his own mind.

Then he would realize they were really things that only he himself could think.

With this realization, sometimes, he saw himself as he looked down.

`` You seen him yet ''??

Benson said, referring to the Indian.

`` He wasn't in the car '', Ramey said.

`` You didn't go clear around '', Benson said.

`` If you want to see something, he's back on the other side by the trunk of the car ''.

`` Too long a waiting line '', Ramey answered, pretending to joke.

A few minutes later the insurance man, a road checker, drove up in the gray coupe with license plates on it from a far-away state.

It was a trick they used to try and conceal their identity when they followed trucks to check their speed.

Sometimes they just parked at the side of the road and used radar on the trucks as they passed.

All the drivers knew about the plates and they also knew about the big floppy straw hat with shredded edges, the kind natives in travel ads wear when they are out joyfully chopping cane.

Horsely, an agent on the east end, wore the hat, trying to look like a tourist.

It had always seemed strange to Ramey that to disguise himself as a tourist, an ex-truck driver like Horsely would merely pick something outlandish and put it on his head.

The insurance man informed them that he had talked to Crumley who was all right and that he would watch the men's personal effects until they towed the rig back to town.

He chatted with Ramey and Benson for a minute or so in the meager shade of the trailer.

Every so often the diminishing sound of a car came under the trailer as it slowed down for the wreck then speeded up again as it got clear.

When they were ready to leave, Benson and Ramey walked back around the rear of the trailer.

`` There's a body you won't mind looking at '', Benson said and they stopped.

She had driven up with her husband in a convertible with Eastern license plates, although the two drivers knew nothing at the moment about that.

She wore shorts and a loose terry-cloth shirt.

Slender and tanned, her dark brown hair was drawn straight back, simply.

`` What outfit does she drive for ''??

Benson said.

Seeing her caused a lurch in Ramey, a recognition.

She might have been someone he had once loved.

He had never seen her before, but now he thought of the manner in which he and Benson went in and out of the cities, at each end of their run.

The truck routes, the industrial areas with walls grimed with diesel smoke passed briefly through his mind -- back alleys were their access to a city and they could never stay.

How would you ever see her again??

The feeling subsided, it was only a small yearning.

Their work was lonely.

`` What's she doing in this bunch ''??

Benson said, and Ramey wondered how close their thoughts might have been.

The girl looked around at the countryside.

Her glance swung past the trailer where the two drivers were standing.

It made only a tiny bump over the two men like a tire over a piece of gravel then moved on.

She began to watch a blonde-haired man, also in shorts, standing right at the rear of the wrecked car in the one spot that most of the crowd had detoured slightly.

What had caught his attention was obscured by the car itself, so that neither the girl nor the truck drivers could see, but Benson knew what it was.

The girl took a couple of steps toward the man in shorts when Benson, in that barefoot courtliness Ramey could never decide was real, said, `` You don't want to go around there, Ma'am ''.

The girl stopped but did not turn her head or acknowledge that someone had spoken to her.

The man stood near the bent levi-clad body of the Indian who lay face down almost under the car.

The two drivers moved closer.

`` What does he want, a spoon ''??

Benson said to Ramey.

One tiny detail in a happening can clog the memory and stick like meat in a crooked tooth, while the rest of the occurrence will go hazy and uncertain.

With Ramey it was a dusty work shoe that was half-off the Indian's foot that he would always remember.

The laces were broken at the bottom of the eyelets but there was still a bow knot at the top.

The slightest twitch would have parted the shoe entirely from the foot, yet the toes were still inside.

The two men in overalls stood just behind the blonde-headed man.

He wore tennis shorts and a white sweater with a red V at the neck, the sleeves pushed above the elbows.

He turned and looked at them with clear blue eyes, immaculate eyes.

He was very tanned -- big hands might have torn him from a Coca-Cola poster.

`` He's dead, isn't he ''??

The man said.

He turned and bent over the body of the Indian.

There was nothing in particular on the man's face.

It was simply a matter of curiosity, a natural right to examine.

`` What's this ''??

The man said, backing up a step, still looking down.

His words were mostly to himself.

`` Don't ''.

There was a gentle concern in Benson's voice.

Ramey looked down and saw the white sneaker at the bottom of the man's tanned leg cautiously nudge a bit of folded, blood-flecked substance lying by itself on the pavement.

`` But what is it ''??

The man said with a tone of impatience.

But what is it??

The man had spoken only once.

Ramey heard the words again inside, weakened, the way moving water sounds through a grove of trees, until he was not sure whether it was sound or light-headedness pressing in his ears.

The sneaker reached out once more to tap against the mass and Ramey's vision darkened except for an unreasonable clarity of the man's leg.

Ramey saw sunlight touch the curly blonde hairs on the brown skin.

He stared at the shining, shining circles of hairs and heard the voice of his partner through trees, `` Don't do that, fella.

Them's brains ''.

The man seemed to sink a little as Ramey brought the tire iron down on his shoulder and it seemed that the blonde head was turning as he hit the man again, with his fist.

Ramey swung and caught the man just to the left of his mouth.

It was a straight, solid, once-in-a-lifetime shot;;

he laid all four knuckles in between the man's cheekbone and his chin.

Ramey's fist and the air expelled from the man's collapsing cheek made a hollow pop in the air like cupped hands clapping together.

The man took two short steps backward then sat down heavily on the pavement.

Ramey heard a cry from the girl and felt a slight pain somewhere in his hand.

As he watched the man sit suddenly, a detached part of his mind observed how very difficult it was, really, to knock a man off his feet.

He hadn't done it this time and he would never again hit anyone so hard.

With a thoughtful look, the man sat on the pavement, legs straight out in front of him.

His arms hung like empty shirt sleeves, and his mouth was slightly open.

After what seemed several seconds, the open mouth grew dark inside then blood began to ooze from it.

The man brought one hand up slowly and the fingers fumbled across his face until he touched his mouth.

He moaned and pulled the hand away.

Even yet there was no realization in his eyes.

Ramey could hear the crowd coming up rapidly behind him and the questioning voices coming over his shoulder had no identity or importance to him.

He did not look around.

`` What happened ''??

Someone said.

`` He's hurt ''!!

A woman's voice said, and then he heard a sort of wail from the man's wife.

The man on the ground began to move;;

one of his hands flattened out on the pavement and supported him.

Blood dripped down the front of his sweater, soaking into a dark streak of dirt that ran diagonally across the white wool on his shoulder, as though the bright V woven into the neckline had melted, running a darker color.

The girl kneeled by her husband with one arm at his back.

`` Can you hear, can you talk to me ''??

She begged.

An incoherent, puzzled sound came from the red mouth.

The girl looked around quickly at several of the people.

None of the crowd had stepped forward to help.

Then she saw Ramey and her face was misshapen with bewilderment.

`` Why did you do it -- why did you hit him ''??

She said, her voice rising.

Ramey said nothing.

A shine in her eyes suddenly became tears and she turned back to her husband again.

Behind Ramey feet scraped beneath sharp questioning whispers.

No one seemed to know for sure what had happened, nor was there any purpose or responsibility in the muttering feet and urgent voices behind the driver, beyond finding out.

Ramey looked around and caught sight of his partner near the front end of the wrecked truck talking to the patrolman.

Benson moved his arms, gesturing with an unfamiliar vigor and talking rapidly.

Ramey caught a glimpse of the insurance man.

Some of the ruddiness was gone from his face and he stared at Ramey.

It's all over now, the driver thought as he saw the patrolman turn and walk rapidly down along the trailer toward them.

Ramey watched him coming with a vision as clean as the glare on the metal sides of the trailer.

He saw the dark sweat spots flip in and out of sight under the patrolman's swinging arms and in the leather holster that swaggered and rolled at the side of his stocky body, the sun left a smoky shine on the narrow strip of blue metal that ran between the horned handles of his pistol.

`` All right, step back ''!!

The patrolman said to no one in particular as he pushed between the fat man in the baseball cap and a young boy in levis.

He walked straight up to the man sitting on the ground and bent over to look at him.

`` You all right ''??

`` Mough -- it's my mough '', the man said, trying to talk without moving his lips.

His brown face looked gray from dirt streaks where his hand had come off the dusty pavement and rubbed across it.

Then he calmly and carefully slugged the remaining five shots into the venomous head -- caught in the wicker back of the chair, the eyes dead on him as the life finally went out of the brute.

The body continued to lash, but now Keith used the legs of the chair to fork the loathsome, bloody mass out of the bungalow.

He slammed the door and listened as his servants ran up, alarmed at the sound of the shots.

He heard their chattering, and then the sounds of hacking as they dismembered the snake right on the porch with wood axes.

It was only then that he turned to look at Penny.

She was sitting on the edge of the bed again, back in the same position where the snake had found her.

The fear had not entirely gone from her face, but there were some other emotions now, crowding into her eyes and the lines of her mouth.

But her hands were calm, now.

She's got guts, thought Keith.

She's got more guts than any other woman in the world.

`` Keith '', said Penny, `` Keith, you were wonderful.

I don't suppose a wife should be grateful to her husband for saving her life, but I am.

Thank you, Keith ''.

He smiled at her sincerity.

And for the hundredth time that week, he was startled at her beauty.

Strange.

Seven years they'd been married.

He knew her mind pretty well, by now, its quick perceptions and sympathies, its painful insistence on truth and directness, its capacity for love almost too deep for a man to reciprocate, even in part.

But her beauty always surprised him anew.

`` I realize that this is hardly the time to say it, Penny '', said Keith.

`` But knowing you, I know that you're glad to be alive, and grateful -- and sorry because I killed the snake, even though I had to.

Isn't that so ''??

Penny lowered her eyes.

`` Yes '', she said, almost in a whisper, as if admitting to a crime.

`` The snake was beautiful, wasn't it ''??

Asked Keith, his voice getting harsher in spite of himself, as he struggled to control his growing anger.

`` It was a king cobra, the largest you ever saw, and it deserved to live out its life in the jungle, didn't it??

didn't it??

''

Penny did not answer.

Now, she just sat there looking at him, without an expression except concern for him.

`` We're all God's creatures, aren't we ''??

Keith was snarling now.

`` All of us -- every goddam roach and worm and killer in that jungle.

You love this village and these stinking brown people because they're God's creatures, too.

And you love Ahmiri, that black bastard of a servant even a little more, because he's a beautiful man.

And he loves you because you're a beautiful woman.

We're all God's creatures, aren't we, Penny??

All of us, that is, except me.

You hate me, you hate my guts, because I like to hunt.

You actually hate me -- and we both know it -- because I killed that filthy snake.

Well, why don't you say something ''??

Penny would not rise to his mood.

`` There isn't anything left to say, is there, Keith ''??

She softly let herself into the bed, and took her regular side, away from the door, where she slept better because Keith was between her and the invader.

He knew she was not sulking, not even angry at him.

Just as he knew that she had stopped loving him.

The Brahmaputra has its headwaters in the tableland of the world, the towering white headwalls of the Himalayas that are unknown to man as any other space on the planet.

For a brief period each year, the rays of the sun are warm enough to melt some of the snows piled a mile deep at the base of the headwalls, and then the pinnacles glisten in the daytime at high noon, and billions of gallons of water begin their slow seepage under the glaciers and across the rockstrewn hanging valleys on their long, meandering journey to the sea -- running east past the sky-carving massifs of Gurla Mandhata and Kemchenjunga, then turning south and curling down through the jungles of Assam, past the Khasi Hills, and into Bengal, past Sirinjani and Madaripur, until the hard water of the melting snows mingles with the soft drainage of fields and at length fans out to meld with the teeming salt depths of the Bay of Bengal.

Keith Sterling had looked down on the Brahmaputra more times than he could remember, during the war days when he flew over the Hump of the world, thinking it high adventure in those times before man was guiding himself through outer space.

But Keith looked down more than up.

He thought of the jungles below him, and of the wild, strange, untracked beauty there and he promised himself that someday he would return, on foot perhaps, to hunt in this last corner of the world where man is sometimes himself the hunted, and animals the lords.

At first it had been just a romantic dream of his, the same as the idea of finishing Oxford after the war.

But `` after the war '' was a luxury of a phrase he did not permit himself.

Wing Commanders in the RAF do not imply survival in the future either in their orders or in their attitudes, to their men or to themselves.

And Keith's record of kills made him a man to listen to -- a man paradoxically, who might even survive.

He became a fighter pilot after the stint over the Hump in the big crates.

The RAF was Britain's weapon of attrition, and flying a fighter plane was the way her sons could serve her best at this point in the war.

He knew how to shoot down Nazis.

And he knew that the men talked about him behind his back, saying that he was one up on everybody else -- including the pilot of the plane with the swastika on it -- because he was chemically incapable of fear.

That was true, but only half the truth.

The other half he didn't like to recognize, even to himself.

He enjoyed the killing.

Not defending England, or being an ace, or fighting for humanity.

He enjoyed killing.

And he would have enjoyed it just as much if he had been a Nazi.

Nowadays, we talk as though the blitz were just a short skirmish.

The Nazis bombed Britain, so the RAF retaliated and shot them all down.

Not quite.

It was a war of nerves, of stamina, of dogged endurance in which the stupid insistence of the British on their right to their own country became ultimately an unsurmountable obstacle to the Nazis, who were better organized and technically superior.

It took a long time before the British tipped the balance.

Keith learned too much about air combat, and air killing, to be risked.

They grounded him( over his protests -- not including his true reason for wanting to fly) and put him in the Command offices.

That was where he met Penny.

He was aware of her as a frightfully good-looking American WAC, a second lieutenant assigned to do the paper work,( regardless of how important she might have thought she was) in the Command offices, but that was all.

Penny knew him better, on her part.

He had a war reputation, but this was the kind of man women like even without medals.

They don't go for bull-like muscle, as a rule.

He had strength in his six-foot frame, but it was like the tensile steel in a rapier.

He was on the thin side, with big hands, and the kind of wrists that give away the power in forearm and bicep.

His hair was black, already greying at the temples in the classic beauty-idiom, the only one permitted to a man.

The pretty little twittering WACS said he had the look of eagles -- and Penny, hating the cliche, had to admit that in this case it applied.

Keith was an eagle.

Penny and Keith had no romance.

No dates or hand-holding.

But they met in one searing moment that gave them to one another instantly.

The Command offices were in the border country, up north, where the radar systems centralized their intelligence reports, and the fighters were dispatched to harry the enemy.

The Nazis knew this, of course, and while their chief quarry was the industrial centers, they let a few drop every time they went over, hoping for a lucky hit.

This time, they had been lucky.

The Command post was underground, and well camouflaged.

But there hadn't been enough time to build it for keeps.

There was a measure of protection in its concrete walls and ceiling, but the engineers who hastily installed it were well aware that concrete is not much better than prayer, if as efficacious, when a direct hit comes along.

This one was actually more of a `` near miss ''.

The bomb plunged into the ground near the Post, but not precisely into the Command room itself.

There was a shattering, cracking sound as the concrete started to buckle, the air filled with dust and flying debris, and everyone in the room -- men and women hit the floor and used the desks as turtlebacks, as ordered.

That is, everyone but Keith and Penny.

They stood there, just the two of them, in the rocking, shattering blast.

Keith was on his feet because he didn't care at all about life any more: Penny on her feet, proudly, because she cared too much.

The bomb was a solitary one.

The blast damaged, but did not destroy the room.

Keith's eyes met Penny's as they stood there in this strange marriage of destruction.

And, as the others began to crawl out from beneath the desks and tend to those wounded, and mark the several killed, he climbed across the debris to Penny and took her hand in his.

The chaplain married them, on the next day.

After the war, Penny had wanted Keith at least to visit her home with her.

She came from Ohio, from what she called a `` small farm '' of two hundred acres, as indeed it was to farmer-type farmers.

But to Keith's London-bred mind, such acreage sounded rather invincible.

It wasn't that, however, which decided them not to go to America.

Keith told Penny about his dream to return to India and Burma.

He stressed the wild beauty of the mountains, and the jungles.

He didn't tell her the truth he now freely admitted to himself.

He couldn't stop killing.

That was his true love, not Penny.

The terrible power of a gun, the thing that blasted the soul out of a living body, man or beast, was one he never wanted to lose.

And in the hunting land, this hunger was considered to be a noble thing.

When they got to Shillong, in Assam, he was happy.

This is a paradise for hunters.

This was the land of the sladang, the great water buffalo with horns forty inches across the spread.

The great black leopards.

The sambur buck, the jungle stag that is even more noble than the Scottish elk.

He even hunted elephant, although the Asian elephant is not quite as ferocious as his African cousin.

But there are big rogues in both countries.

These were the ones Keith sought out -- the loners, the ones who killed for the joy of it, like himself.

He and Penny would go out on tame elephants, raised from babyhood in the keddah.

And while he was ever alert for game, and most particularly a tiger, Penny marvelled at the Eden they were traversing.

They came upon cheetal deer at woodland pools.

Peacocks strutted across their path, preening.

There were fantastic flowers without perfume, and gaudy birds without song.

Mouse deer played around the feet of the elephants, or fled when the mighty legs thrashed too close.

Wild boar watched their progress with little pig eyes, and grunted derision when they didn't consider such game worthy of a shot from the.

Now, the next morning, they were anchored at The Elbow and the boat was riding directly over the underwater ledge where the green water turned to deepest blue and the cliff dropped straight down 600 fathoms, with the weighted line beside it;;

and Robinson Roy, who had gone down this line ten minutes before to set a new depth record for the free dive, was already back on the surface.

He and his safety man, Herr Schaffner, swam up to the boarding ladder together.

The German courteously indicated that Robinson should mount first.

Robinson clambered heavily into the boat, sat down, and stripped off his triple-tank assembly.

He was frowning.

He took his mask from his forehead and threw it, unexpectedly, across the deck.

`` Temper, temper '', Mrs. Forsythe said, laughing uneasily.

A phony blonde hanging onto a bygone youth and beauty, but irreparably stringy in the neck, she was already working on her second gin and tonic, though it was not yet ten A.M.

`` I loused it '', Rob said, with a savage note in his voice.

`` All I have to do to set the record is to go on down.

So instead I come up ''.

`` Was it my equipment ''??

The German asked.

`` Was it something went bad with the breathing ''??

`` The equipment was fine '', Rob stated, standing up.

He was a huge young man of twenty-four, clothed in muscle, immensely strong, with a habitual gentleness and diffidence of manner that was submerged under his present agitation.

He stared stonily at the floor.

`` I was down to 275.

I've been that far half a dozen times.

I don't get it why this time I should pull such a stupid trick ''.

`` Well, I get it '', Artie said, still on the ladder.

`` You are a big muscle-bound ape and you got this idea about setting a record.

And you also got this little spark in your bird-brain that tells you to turn around before you drown yourself.

So you turn around ''.

`` No, it wasn't that '', Rob said.

A note of awe came into his voice.

`` When I came up, damnit, I thought I was going down.

I came up maybe fifty feet before I knew what was happening ''.

`` Pressure-happy '', Artie said, and climbed in.

`` That's right '', Robinson said.

`` I was expecting it, sure.

But when it happens to you like that, I tell you, and you're a hundred feet from where you thought you were -- well, it makes you think.

You don't head back down again.

Not me, anyway.

Not right away ''.

He had his voice under control again: no one became aware that he was terrified by what had just happened to him.

Waddell, the newspaperman, was a fellow in his middle forties, with a graying crewcut, heavy-framed glasses, and a large jaw padded with fat.

Now he was going to show how much he knew.

`` Our boy didn't chicken out, no sir.

He ran into the rapture of the depths.

Nitrogen narcosis.

It makes the diver feel drunk ''.

`` Well, that's the only way to be '', Mrs. Forsythe said, and gave her brassy laugh.

`` Maybe not, if you're 200 feet under water '', Artie said.

`` Anyway '', Waddell went on.

`` It's nothing to fool with.

It can kill you.

Personally, I don't blame him for giving up the dive, much as I regret losing the story ''.

`` Nobody's giving anything up '', Robinson said.

He stood there, towering over them all: gentle, mighty, determined, the moving force in the group;;

and yet like a child among adults.

`` You think I got you and Artie and Herr Schaffner all the way out here just for the boat ride??

I'm going down again ''.

`` That's my boy ''!!

Mr. Forsythe exclaimed.

`` Rob's not going to give up as easy as all that ''.

He was a florid, puffy man in his early sixties, very natty in his yachting cap, striped jacket and white flannels.

He went to Key West every fall and winter and was the only man in town who did not know that his title of `` Commodore '' was never used without irony.

Old Commodore Forsythe, who had once lost a fifty-dollar bet on whether he could get both motors started and turn on the running lights without accidentally turning on something else first.

Now it did not occur to him even to wonder whether it was wise for Robinson to dive again: Rob was his boy, the kid he had rescued from the streets, the object of his pride.

`` Why '', he went on, `` when Rob asked me if he could make his dive on this trip, I didn't think twice about it.

I've helped him along ever since he was a youngster hanging around his brother's tackle shop.

Hell, I gave him the first decent job he ever had, six, seven -- how many years ago was it, Rob ''??

`` Seven years ago, Commodore '', Rob said impassively.

He was thinking, big deal: skipper on his drunken fishing parties for seven years and no better off than when I started.

`` Excuse me '', he said abruptly.

He went down the steps to the galley and sleeping quarters;;

went into the forward stateroom and locked the door behind him.

`` When you gotta go, you gotta go '', Mrs. Forsythe said.

Waddell muttered something about taking a look around and climbed up to the flying bridge.

He was disturbed by what had happened on the dive and by what he remembered of a conversation he had had the night before with the German, who had come out of the head while he was fixing himself a drink in the galley.

`` Hi there, Schaffner '', he had said.

`` Can I make you one ''??

`` No thank you very much '', Schaffner had answered in his accented English.

`` I do not drink so much, thank you ''.

Waddell had looked the man over, trying to size him up.

He was in his early forties, rather short and very compactly built, and with a manner that was reserved and stiff despite his efforts to adapt himself to American ways.

His open face seemed to promise a sort of innocence, until one looked into his eyes, which had no warmth in them but only alert intelligence.

Waddell had heard that he had been a commando in Rommel's Afrika Corps, and he said to himself: I'd hate to run into him in the desert on a dark night.

Aloud he had said, making conversation:

`` Rob tells me he's using your Atlantis equipment on the dive ''.

`` Yes '', Herr Schaffner had said.

`` He's one hell of a decent boy.

I like that kid ''.

`` I agree, yes ''.

`` And if the dive goes OK he has the exclusive import rights to your line for this country, is that right ''??

`` Well, no '', Herr Schaffner said.

Waddell turned to face him.

`` No ''??

He asked.

`` But that's what he told me.

Why, that's his main reason for making the dive ''.

Shaffner looked at him, altogether without guile, and shrugged his shoulders, making a little spreading gesture with his two hands.

`` What do you mean ''??

Waddell asked, frowning.

`` Please let me explain '', the German said earnestly, his face still devoid of deceit.

`` I have in Europe a gross business of seven million dollars the year.

Now I wish to enter the American market, where the competition is very strong.

I must have a powerful representative here, a firm with a national distribution and ten, twenty thousand dollars to advertise my products.

With all respect to a fine young man, Mr. Roy is not able to provide these necessaries ''.

Waddell was not an eminently moral person, but he did not like what he had just heard.

`` Did you tell him all this ''??

He asked.

`` Perhaps not in so many words '', the German said.

`` But surely you have misunderstood Mr. Roy.

Never, never did I offer him the exclusive rights.

We spoke of the need for advertising, and I agreed that the deep dive would be most useful for publicity.

He was most eager to make the dive;;

of course, I was willing.

But there was no definite agreement about business arrangements ''.

`` Well, damn '', Waddell said.

There was the end of his front-page feature story, with byline.

He started out the door.

`` One moment ''!!

Herr Schaffner said.

`` You intend to speak with Mr. Roy ''??

`` What else ''??

Waddell asked.

`` If you will pardon, I think it would be better if not.

Mr. Roy is determined to make this dive.

Whatever you tell him he will dive.

I know this from my talks with him ''.

`` Well, let's let him make up his own mind, OK ''??

Waddell said.

`` On the basis of the facts ''.

`` You will make him unhappy and anxious '', the German said.

`` At 200, 300, 400 feet under the water, when he must be paying very much attention, he will be thinking about what you are telling him.

It is not good, Mr. Waddell: you will do him great harm ''.

There was no doubt that Herr Schaffner meant every word of what he said.

Waddell came back from the door and sat on a bunk.

`` I am an honest man '', the German said with fervor.

`` I will give Mr. Roy his due for this dive.

I will make him distributor for all of Florida -- a big market.

All tourists come to Florida.

This will help him to get out of his little tackle shop.

Yes!!

But there is no use causing him to worry at this time ''.

The German's words worked on the newspaperman like a reprieve from an odious duty.

He took a big swig of his drink.

It would be a colossal shame to throw away a story like this.

`` I think maybe you're right, Schaffner '', he said.

`` He has the distributorship for Florida, you say ''??

`` Yes '', the German said.

`` At least for South Florida ''.

`` By God '', Waddell said, `` we don't want to upset the boy at this time of all times.

I guess you're right ''.

He sloshed his drink around and drained it in a few large gulps.

The story was shaping up nicely in his mind: the young pioneer, as of old, altruistically braving the unknown;;

the rewards prompt and juicy in modern big-business America.

`` Join me in another ''??

He had asked.

`` Thank you '', the German had said courteously.

`` I do not drink so much ''.

Now, in that same cabin, Robinson fell to his knees beside a bunk.

Fear and relief mingled in his churning emotions.

He pressed his palms together and addressed himself to the patron saint of divers in a hurried and anxious whisper.

`` Blessed Saint Nicholas, I thank thee for getting me out of that mess and sending me up instead of down when I was bewildered.

And when I make the dive again '' -- He paused;;

crossed himself;;

said a Hail Mary, slowly and with understanding.

Folding between his hands the cross that hung from his neck, he took his appeal direct to Headquarters.

`` Holy Mary, Mother of God, Star of the Sea, stay Thou with me on this next dive.

Make it come off all right.

Let me set the record this time, and let me get back OK, so the German will give me the exclusive.

And make my life different and better from this time on.

Amen ''.

He crossed himself again and rose.

He felt a good deal less shaky.

As he reached for the door there was a knock on it and when he opened he found Artie, who came in and sat down on a bunk.

Artie had picked up a snorkle and was twirling it on his forefinger.

He waited awhile before he said, `` Roy, you know your decompression table, don't you ''??

`` You know I know it '', Robinson answered warily.

`` You came straight up from 275 without a stop '', Artie said.

`` Well, I was a little bit confused.

Anyway, I wasn't down long enough to matter.

You don't see me stretched out on the deck, do you ''??

`` You know what they say about two deep dives in one day '', Artie went on, still twirling the snorkle and studying it intently.

`` I don't think you should go down again ''.

Early that day Matsuo saw a marine.

The enemy came looming around a bend in the trail and Matsuo took a hasty shot, then fled without knowing the result, ran until breath was a pain in his chest and his legs were rubbery.

As his feet slowed, he felt ashamed of the panic and resolved to make a stand.

He crossed the next meadow and climbed a tree where the jungle trail resumed.

In the leafiest part of the tree, straddling a broad horizontal limb, he could see over the meadow.

For a while he was content to let events develop in their good time.

He had no doubt the marine was the lead scout of a column, and while his shot had probably bred indecision, they would soon come hunting.

His superiors had emphasized that marines tortured others for the sheer pleasure.

Yesterday;;

today;;

tomorrow: no surrender.

His remembering the self-dictate brought no peace -- only a faint chill of doubt.

He murmured to himself, with firmness: `` No surrender ''.

It was best to die fighting the marines.

His superiors had also preached this, saying it was the way for eternal honor.

What if the marines never came??

His comrades were all dead.

He had no rice.

Then it would be a choice between starvation and suicide.

Whichever the way, he would rot in this vast choking green, his wife never to receive an urn of his ashes.

He sighed and leaned for a moment against the trunk.

His fingers touched the bone handle of a knife.

The knife, an ammunition pouch, and a half-filled bottle of purified water hung on his belt.

Besides the belt he wore a loin cloth.

As he looked up from picking at a leg ulcer, he saw a marine in the jungle across the clearing.

Gloom receded.

The marine came to the edge of the green jungle mist and stayed, as though debating whether to brave the sunlight.

His fatigues made a streak of almost phosphorescent green in the mist.

`` Come out, come out in the meadow '', Matsuo said under his breath.

The man leaned against a tree and wiped a sleeve across his face.

A signal??

Matsuo lifted his rifle, easing the sling under his left upper arm for steadiness.

Fresh on his mind were events of the past day when his whole regiment was destroyed in the hills.

They had fought from caves, and the marines resorted to burning them out.

Even now, like a ringing in his ears, he heard the wooooosh of flame-throwers squirting great orange billows.

A wave of flame rippling through their cave had reached Nagamo, his friend, and with a shriek the man bolted through the entrance, then slowed to the jerky walk of a puppet, his uniform blazing.

The marines let him advance.

When he sank on his knees, they had allowed him to char without administering the stroke of mercy.

Matsuo had faked death and was pitched on a stack of corpses, both the burned and the unburned, the latter decomposing rapidly under the tropical sun.

The callous marines had laughed at each other's retching, while stacking bodies.

Matsuo repeatedly choked down his own nausea.

At nightfall he had been able to sneak down a hillside and into the jungle, reeking of death.

Apprehensively he peered to the left, to the right into the leafy, vine-crisscrossed maze.

He decided that the marines must be deploying around the meadow, with the one left to distract him.

He strained his hearing.

Cautious feet stepping on leafmold;;

faint creaking of belts and slings;;

whispers: he heard none of these.

Only the hum of insects and the distant fluttering call of a bird.

Because he couldn't hear them, he was more convinced they were there.

A spectacle occurred across the meadow: the lone marine took a seat on the ground;;

leaning sidewise on a tree trunk, he embraced it.

Humiliation made Matsuo tremble.

While his comrades cocked the trap, that one behaved as if it was some dull maneuver.

Taking aim at the man's face, Matsuo squeezed the trigger up to the point of discharge, and then he changed his mind.

He wanted the arrogant marine to know fear, and so he aimed above the head.

The shot reverberated in diminishing whiplashes of sound.

Hush followed.

Like a mischievous boy expecting punishment, Matsuo awaited reaction from the jungle.

How stupid to give his position away.

The jungle did not retort.

The sitter remained seated hugging the tree.

Before long the atmosphere reverted to its old normalcy, and insects hummed and birds occasionally called.

Matsuo puzzled and grew anxious over the complete passiveness, concluding that he was the butt of a devilish joke.

Five or so minutes later the marine abruptly pulled up and stepped into sunlight, immediately throwing his hands over his eyes.

He went into a whirling dance, a sort of blind chasing of the tail.

It ended when he tumbled;;

but jumping right up, he staggered in no particular direction.

He wore no head cover of any kind and, more odd, had no visible weapon.

With a sudden decisiveness he lurched in Matsuo's direction, crossing the meadow in a zigzagging gallop.

When he got closer to the tree, Matsuo noted the wild look on his face.

The pockets of his jacket bulged.

Hand grenades.

The bobbing head was a poor target, so Matsuo shot him in the upper trunk.

The marine spun, clapping a hand high on his chest, and dived forward.

In the hush that followed the echoes, Matsuo was tense.

They could come on him now without difficulty.

Gradually he reached a conclusion.

The marine was alone, for they were impatient people and by now would have vied to knock him from the tree.

Down the tree he scrambled and knelt at the edge of foliage.

The marine was sprawled some thirty yards away, one arm extended.

Matsuo jumped when the hidden arm flopped out.

Reflex??

Rifle leveled on the man, he made a rush.

Heat, in the sunlight, pressed in like an invisible crowd.

He squatted by the head, gently placing the rifle on the ground.

With a snakestrike motion he grasped the hair, and, twisting, pulled the marine over on his back.

He was bearded.

The bullet had penetrated in the area of the right collarbone;;

around the hole, blood glistened in a little patch.

Maintaining his clutch on the hair, Matsuo watched the closed eyes while rummaging in the jacket pockets.

In one: a package of cigarettes and a tinplated lighter, both sticky from the man's bleeding.

In the other: a wristwatch with broken crystal wrapped in a dirty handkerchief.

One by one he tossed the objects aside.

He didn't smoke and could not light fires with a flintless lighter;;

he had no use any longer for exact time, even had the watch been running.

Then there was no saying how many times the marine had blown his nose on the handkerchief.

Too bad the marine had no water.

From its holder he took his own canteen.

The cap was stuck and made a thin rusty squeaking as he applied pressure.

The marine's eyes opened, squeezed shut, then opened squinted in the glare.

So, alive.

Matsuo put the bottle to his own lips.

The marine reached up a hand.

Matsuo shook his head.

`` None for you ''.

The marine blinked, soon dropping his hand.

Not only had he no canteen, but he lacked even the belt to hang one on.

`` You came well equipped to die ''.

Some odor made him lean over the man.

He sniffed and recognized it.

Sake.

So that had been his difficulty.

Drunk on sake, he must have wandered off from his bivouac.

The marine tried to roll on his right side, and moaned.

When he rolled on the left side, propping on his left elbow, Matsuo seized his hair and pulled him back over.

`` Be a good turtle ''.

Awkwardly with one hand Matsuo got the cap back on the water bottle.

The smell of sake had freshened yesterday's events in his thoughts.

In the caves, with other supplies, they had kept cases of sake.

The marine shut his eyes.

`` Are you a thrower of flame, marine ''??

Matsuo took the small knife from its scabbard and laid it on the ground, out of the marine's reach and away from their shadows.

He waited in his squat, gripping the hair.

Every so often he turned the knife.

Its blade was dazzling in the intense sunlight.

The sun was noon high and Matsuo perspired until his body was dripping.

Wet also were the marine's fatigues and the face had an oily film.

The man had thrown the left hand over his eyes.

Now and again he murmured something that ended in a giggle.

He must have saturated himself in the drink, for the bullet not to shock him out of his drunken haze.

Matsuo shook his head.

Strange.

At last he reached for the knife.

Even the bone handle scorched, and he retrieved the marine's handkerchief to wrap it.

First he barely touched the blade on the hand which shaded the eyes.

The marine yelled and flung the hand away.

With a firm grip on the man's hair Matsuo applied the blade flat on a cheek.

A shrill yelp, kicked legs, and groping hands that circled Matsuo's wrist.

Matsuo wrenched free and burned the hands into retreat;;

burned the other cheek;;

burned each hand when they came groping again.

The marine commenced to weep and it blighted the sense of enjoyment.

Matsuo stood up.

`` A small measure of payment, marine ''.

He dropped the knife in its scabbard, hung the rifle behind a shoulder.

The marine, hands on cheeks, rolled by his unwounded side onto his stomach.

He ceased weeping.

Matsuo walked toward his tree, once glancing back.

The marine was still.

He would soon die.

As Matsuo climbed by using the vines and kicking his feet against the trunk, a mood of gloom immersed him like a jungle shadow.

What now??

In the jungle, birds were mute, while insects preserved only the monotony of living.

Someone called.

It was the marine: head lifted, he strained and called.

Then he astonished Matsuo by pushing and dragging himself until he sat.

He cupped his mouth and yelled.

Matsuo hustled the rifle off his shoulder.

Once and for all he'd finish this marine who would not die.

He aimed, but listened.

It sounded as if the man were calling him: `` Hey, Japanese hey there, Japanese ''.

The man tilted back his head and went through the pantomime of drinking from a container.

He performed the act twice more, and the begging in his tone grew more distinct.

`` Sake ''??

Matsuo called.

The marine nodded vigorously.

Matsuo laughed, slung the rifle.

The marine was a winehead.

His superiors had said that all marines were depraved.

The marine slumped forward into a bow like a priest before an idol.

Remembering his own thirst, Matsuo took out his water bottle.

One swallow was all he would have;;

he was very thirsty, but he must observe water discipline.

His years of campaigning had taught him the value of water discipline.

He began to uncap the bottle, the rusty cap squealing on its threads.

Popping upright, the marine waved both hands and shouted.

Of course it was water he really craved;;

down in the broil of the sun he was becoming dried out.

The marine shouted for it until it seemed that his voice had to crack.

Matsuo shook his head.

He had no water for an enemy.

And when this was gone, he hadn't even a little bitter tablet to purify other water if he were to discover some stagnant jungle pool.

He capped the bottle and replaced it.

After all, he had less reason to desire it than the marine.

Before much longer the marine quieted down.

His head slumped.

The upper part of his packet had stained dark.

`` Marine.

There is nothing for you '', Matsuo said.

`` Your superiors will certainly beat you for your desertion, besides the dishonor of it.

I've nothing for you ''.

From the convulsive quivers of the man's shoulders it was plain he had resumed the weeping.

He reminded Matsuo of a similar thing he had witnessed in China.

In China it was a baby sitting on a railroad platform, smudged, blood-specked, with the village burning about him and shells exploding.

Chairs scraped back and customers hastily vacated their tables as the tall young buffalo hunter pushed open the swing doors and walked towards the bar.

Only Blue Throat and his gang stayed where they were.

Blue Throat was slumped with his back against the bar, elbows supporting his massive frame.

He leered at the stranger as the distance between them closed.

`` Since when did they allow beardless kids into the saloon bars of this town, boys ''??

He asked.

`` Seems to me I don't remember altering any law about that ''.

He straightened up, alert now as the buffalo hunter came closer.

`` Stay right here where you are, kid '', he called.

`` I don't aim to have minors breathing down my neck when I'm a-drinking '':

The stranger ignored him.

He didn't stop till he was within three feet of Blue Throat and by that time the gang leader's right hand was on the butt of his revolver.

`` I'm Billy Tilghman '', said the stranger, `` and I've come for Pat Conyers' body ''.

`` And what makes you think you're going to get it, pretty boy ''??

`` Because I'm asking.

Most of the time I get what I ask for ''.

Blue Throat winked at his six cronies.

`` The kid has no manners, boys.

Shall we teach him some ''??

His gun was half drawn when he asked the question, but the weapon never left its holster.

Tilghman's clenched fist swept over in a terrific right cross and clipped the big gunfighter on the side of his chin.

His head snapped round and he reeled back, crashing into the table where his buddies were sprawling.

Tilghman leapt on to him, dragged him upright and hit him again, this time sending him careening against the bar.

A bullet gouged into the bar top an inch from Tilghman's stomach as Blue Throat's henchmen started shooting.

Tilghman flung himself aside, dropped on one knee and pulled his own gun.

The Colt roared twice and two men dropped, writhing.

A third shot doused the light.

Somewhere at the far end of the room a voice yelled, `` You all right, Billy ''??

`` Yes, George, but I ain't got poor old Pat's body yet.

And I aim to have it ''.

He fired again, and somewhere in the gloom a man screamed.

Another took off his gun belt and flung his weapons to the floor.

`` OK, Tilghman, I'm quitting ''.

`` And me '', said another Blue Throat henchman.

Somebody brought a light.

Tilghman and his partner, George Rust, herded the men into a corner.

`` And now '', said Tilghman with deadly calm, `` I'll repeat what I said.

I've come for Pat Conyers' body ''.

In two minutes the body of Tilghman's former comrade, who had been killed by Blue Throat in a gambling brawl the previous night, was carried into the town's funeral parlor to be prepared for decent burial.

Blue Throat, nursing an aching jaw and a collosal dose of wounded pride, rode out of town with the survivors of the fight.

`` That critter will be back tomorrow '', predicted George Rust, `` and he'll bring fifty of his kind back with him.

Blue Throat won't stand for this.

He'll shoot up the town ''.

The prediction was correct.

The Reverend James Doran had scarcely completed Pat Conyers' last rites on Boot Hill in the township of Petrie, when shots were heard in the distance.

`` Amen '', said the Reverend Doran, grabbing his rifle propped up against a tombstone, `` and now my brethren, it would seem that our presence is required elsewhere ''.

Billy Tilghman and his comrades rode off to the battle.

Blue Throat, who had ruled the town with his six-shooter for the last six months, certainly had no intention of relinquishing his profitable dictatorship.

It was essential that he should restore his formidable reputation as a rip-roaring, ruthless gun-slinger, and this was the time-honored Wild West method of doing it.

He rode in at the head of sixty trigger-happy and liquor-crazed desperadoes and took over a livery barn at the entrance to Main Street.

The entire length of the street could be raked with rifle fire from this barn.

Any posse riding down the street to demand Blue Throat's surrender would be wiped out with one deadly burst of fire.

The law-abiding citizens of Petrie had gathered inside Kaster's Store, halfway down the street.

Several were firing into the barn when Billy Tilghman arrived.

He sized up the situation and shook his head.

`` If Blue Throat has his way he'll keep us all cooped up in here for days '', he said.

`` There's only one thing to move him fast, and we have it right here in this very store ''.

He called the store owner and together they went into the stockroom.

Billy returned with six sticks of dynamite.

`` I'm gonna drop these into Blue Throat's lap '', he announced, `` and I'd like every gun to be firing into that barn while I get near enough to toss 'em through the window ''.

He slipped outside, hugging the walls of buildings and dodging into doorways.

Blue Throat's men spotted him and a hail of bullets splintered the store fronts and board walk as he passed.

Fifty yards away from the barn he dodged inside a barber's shop and came out at the back.

Here he couldn't be seen by Blue Throat and his gang.

All he had to do was light the fuses of the dynamite sticks, run to within ten yards of an open window in the barn and hurl the sticks through.

Billy Tilghman did just that.

Within seconds the big barn was blasted into smoking splinters, with every outlaw either dead or injured inside.

It was the abrupt end of Blue Throat's dictatorship in Petrie.

Though only slightly injured himself the big hoodlum never returned to those parts.

To Tilghman the incident was just one of a long list of hair-raising, smash-'em-down adventures on the side of the law which started in 1872 when he was only eighteen years old, and did not end till fifty years later when he was shot dead after warning a drunk to be quiet.

Of all the rip-roaring two-fisted tough boys of the Old West, `` Uncle Billy Tilghman '' stands out head and shoulders.

He was the lawman who survived more gunfights than any other famous gun-slinging character in the book.

He saw the most action, beat up more badmen with his bare fists, broke up the most gangs and sent more murderers to the gallows than any other U.S. marshal who lived before or after him.

For fifty years his guns and ham-like fists shot holes through and battered the daylights out of the enemies of law and order in the frontier towns of the West.

The deeds of countless western bandits and outlaws have been glorified almost to the point of hero-worship, but because Billy Tilghman remained strictly on the side of the law throughout his action-packed career, his achievements and the appalling risks he took while taming the West have remained almost unsung.

Citizens took the view that a lawman was expected to risk his life on the odd occasion anyway, but this fighting fury of a man risked it regularly over a period of half a century.

He came within an ace of being riddled with bullets during his long fight with the Doolin gang which terrorized Oklahoma in the 1890's.

Led by Bill Doolin, these mobsters specialized in train robberies but as a sideline they looted stores and robbed banks, making liberal use of their guns.

Bill Doolin's ambition, it appeared, was to carve out his name with bullets alongside those of Jesse James and Billy the Kid, and Bill Tilghman had sworn he would stop him.

Tilghman knew that some ranchers were hand-in-glove with the Doolin gang.

They bought rustled cattle from the outlaw, kept him supplied with guns and ammunition, harbored his men in their houses.

Billy decided to set an example by arresting one of the ranchers, named Ed Dunn, who lived at Rock Fort.

On a bitterly cold day in January, 1895, accompanied only by Neal Brown as his deputy, Tilghman left the township of Guthrie and headed for Rock Fort and Dunn's ranch.

It was snowing hard when they got there and they saw no horses outside.

The only evidence of occupation came from the chimney, which was belching out thick smoke.

The two lawmen halted their wagon about twenty yards from the door.

`` Wait here, Neal '', said Tilghman.

`` If I don't come out within half an hour ride back to town and bring out a posse ''.

Leaving his rifle in the wagon, Tilghman walked up to the door and hammered on it.

There was no reply so he shoved it open with his foot and stepped inside.

Directly opposite the door was a roaring log fire, a welcome sight on that bitterly cold day.

Seated near it with his back to the door was the rancher, Ed Dunn.

`` Hello, Ed '', said Tilghman.

The rancher grunted an acknowledgement but didn't move.

Tilghman closed the door behind him and walked towards the fire.

Suddenly he saw something which made his big heart give a sickening lurch and caused the hairs to bristle on the back of his neck.

Along each side of the room were six tiered bunks, each one screened off with a curtain.

And projecting wickedly through these curtains were the gleaming muzzles of six rifles, all trained on Billy Tilghman.

The fighting marshal had walked right into a trap and at any moment six slugs might slam into his hide.

Thinking fast, Tilghman never hesitated for one instant.

He walked right up to the fire as though blissfully unaware of the guns covering him.

The men behind them were Bill Doolin and five of his gang -- every man a killer.

`` Cold day '', said Tilghman, placing his hands behind him and casually presenting his backside to the fire.

`` Just dropped in to ask where Jed Hawkins lives.

Can't seem to locate landmarks in this snow ''.

The rancher was trembling.

He wouldn't look Tilghman in the face.

`` Follow the river for five miles '', he said hoarsely.

`` Jed's homestead is on the south bank ''.

Resisting the overwhelming temptation to flng himself out of that bristling death-trap, Tilghman deliberately engaged the nervous rancher in trivial conversation for a good ten minutes.

All that time rifle barrels were pointing unwaveringly at his head and body.

One false move on his part and he would be a dead man.

`` Well '', he announced, `` Guess I'll be going now, Ed, and thanks for the warmup ''.

He strolled back to the door, whistling softly, hands still clasped behind him.

He left the house and almost certain death without even increasing his pace and wondered by what remarkable stroke of Providence he had been allowed to come out alive.

But he knew well enough that those guns would still be trained on his back as he walked towards the wagon.

If he showed signs of collecting his rifle and going back with his deputy to the ranch he would be shot down instantly.

Leisurely he climbed on to the wagon next to Neal Brown.

`` Don't say or do anything '', he said softly.

`` Just get out of here without it looking as though we're in a hurry.

That place is crawling with Bill Doolin and his gang ''.

Even as he spoke those words Billy Tilghman's life hung on a thread.

Back in the house a hoodlum named Red Buck, sore because Billy had been allowed to leave unscathed, jumped from a bunk and swore he was going after him to kill him right then.

`` You'll stay right here '', commanded Bill Doolin, covering Red with his rifle.

`` Billy Tilghman is too good a man to shoot in the back.

We'll let him go ''.

But the fighting marshal's fifty-year run of immunity from violent death came to a full and final stop one night in a street at Cromwell, Oklahoma, where he had been sent to clean up the gambling and vice rackets.

Wiley Lynn, a self-styled prohibition officer, had hit town the previous day and had been drinking ever since.

That night he reeled out of Ma Murphy's dance hall and proceeded to disturb the peace by shooting off his revolver.

For several months now, Jack Carter, a big overgrown boy of fifteen with a fuzzy, pimpled face and greenish catlike eyes with a lot of red in them, had been haunted by a dream, a vision, of a Woman.

This Woman had no distinct shape or size and no particular face, but she radiated warmth, a sweet warmth;;

she would talk to him in a soothing voice about things his mother would have said were not nice and put her hands on him and kiss him passionately.

When she would do these things, he would turn blind for an instant and become sick at his stomach.

Then he would run to the toilet behind the house.

Sometimes he did this three or four times a day, for this Woman was almost always with him.

He would feel ashamed each time and wonder whether his mother and father knew -- thinking they might see it in his eyes or smell it on him.

But they never said anything, so he figured it was all right.

And so when Miss Langford came to teach at the one-room Chestnut school, where Jack was a pupil in the eighth grade, the Woman of Jack's mind assumed the teacher's face and figure.

He could not keep his eyes off her when at school;;

when he went home at night, he took her with him in his mind, and she did the things the anonymous Woman used to do, and he did the thing afterwards each time as he used to do.

When he awoke in the mornings, she was in his mind and he could hardly wait to get to school to be near her in the flesh.

Miss Langford( her first name was Evelyn) was an attractive girl.

Tall, blonde, blue-eyes, fair, buxom without being heavy, she cut a fine figure of budding womanhood as she swished among the pupils in her fresh, starched summer dress.

Something was beginning to stir and come alive in her, too( it may have been there for a good while, since she was twenty now;;

but if it had been, it had been smothered until now by fear): you could tell it by the way she watched the older, bigger boys, like Jack.

She would look at Jack, with that hidden something in her eyes, and Jack would see the Woman and become breathless and a little sick.

School began in August, the hottest part of the year, and for the first few days Miss Langford was very lenient with the children, letting them play a lot and the new ones sort of get acquainted with one another.

The first two or three days they went home early.

All, that is, except Jack.

He hung around the schoolhouse, watching through a window from outside while Miss Langford straightened desks and put the room in order.

Once( this was on the third day of school) she kneeled down to pick up some books where they'd dropped on the floor and Jack looked up her dress -- at the bare expanse of incredibly white leg.

He thought for a moment his heart had stopped beating.

About that time Miss Langford straightened up and looked out the window directly at him, he thought, although probably she didn't even see him.

He jumped back, ducked and ran, crouching, down the hill away from the school.

He didn't look back and he ran until he was out of sight of the schoolhouse and out of breath;;

then he slowed to a walk.

The vision became even stronger now.

`` I'll get her yet '', he muttered to himself.

`` I've got to get her ''.

That night he dreamed a dream violent with passion, in which he and the Woman, now the teacher, did everything except engage in the act( and this probably only because he had never engaged in the act in reality), and when he awoke the next morning his heart was afire.

He ate litle that morning, and his mother became concerned, inasmuch as he usually ate heartily.

`` What's the matter, honey ''??

She said, with the solicitude of a middle-aged woman for her only child.

`` Aren't you hungry ''??

`` No, I'm not hungry '', he said, pushing back the bacon and eggs.

Outside it was already hot at 7:30 A.M., and it was getting hot in the kitchen.

He felt a little sick at his stomach.

`` Are you sick ''??

`` No '', he said.

`` I'll be all right.

I guess it's this hot weather ''.

`` Don't you play hard today then.

And if you get sick, ask the teacher to let you come home early.

Daddy left the car for me, and I'm going to town this afternoon ''.

`` OK., I won't play hard '', he promised.

Just then Charles Lever yelled, `` Hey, Jack '', from the quarry road which ran behind the Carter house, and Jack grabbed the lunch from the table and darted out the kitchen door, yelling `` Good-bye, Mom '' over his shoulder.

`` Whaddya say, boy ''??

Charles said, grinning, showing his huge yellow teeth.

Charles, also fifteen, was tall and skinny, scraggly, with straight black hair like an Indian's and sharp brown eyes.

He considered himself handsome and seemed to think all the girls were after him.

`` You know what I done last night ''??

Charles said as they picked their way over the rocky road which led up the hill away from the Dixie Highway, through a corn field and a patch of woods to the school.

Jack knew of course that the tale to be unfolded would involve a girl and probably be dirty, because girls were Charles' only apparent interest.

But Jack always derived vicarious sensual thrills from Charles' revelations( even when he suspected his friend of exaggeration or invention), so he usually invited them, as he did now.

`` No.

What ''??

`` I got Margaret Rider in one of them old box cars down there by the quarry ''.

A nude imaginary picture of Miss Langford flashed across Jack's mind.

His heart beat faster.

`` Hell you say ''??

He said, lapsing into the profanity he often used when away from his parents and especially when he was with Charles.

`` How'd you do it ''??

`` Hell, I jist got on top of -- ''

`` No, I mean how'd you get her to do it ''??

`` Hell, I jist ask her ''.

`` Jist like that ''??

`` Hell, yes.

She's been hangin' around me a lot here lately, and I figgered I might as well's try it.

Besides I heard her old uncle that stays there has been doin' it ''.

`` I never heard that ''.

`` It's all over Branchville.

If you'd get out of your back yard once in a while you might even get her your ownself ''.

`` I might try it one of these days '', Jack said wonderingly, thinking of Miss Langford.

When they reached the school, a gang of boys and girls were already there playing `` crack the whip '' in front of the schoolhouse.

Miss Langford, in a fresh white dress and low-heeled white sandals, without socks, was out there with them, trying to get them inside.

`` Time for books '', she yelled, jingling a little five-and-dime store bell in her right hand.

`` Let's go inside ''.

`` Oh, come on Miss Langford, play with us just onct '', one of the little girls begged, smiling wistfully.

`` No, not now '', said the teacher.

`` Maybe at dinner time.

Come inside now ''.

The children grudgingly stopped playing then and straggled into the schoolhouse.

Jack watched Miss Langford all morning.

He could think of nothing else save his mental image of her nude figure and what Charles had said that morning about Margaret Rider.

Occasionally he would look across the aisle at Margaret, fourteen and demure in a fresh green organdy dress, sitting in the sixth-grade row, and he could hardly believe she would do what Charles had said she did.

At noontime, remembering what the teacher had said about maybe playing with the kids, Jack stayed close to the schoolhouse while all the other big boys, except Charles, went off out the road to play ball.

`` Why ain't you playin' ball ''??

He asked Charles suspiciously as they sat in the well-house shade, watching the girls congregate in front of the schoolhouse.

`` Miss Langford, come out and play with us like you promised '', several of the little girls called.

`` I'd druther stay here and watch the girls '', Charles grinned.

`` Maybe some of 'em will fall down and we'll see up their dress ''.

`` Maybe '', Jack said idly, watching for Miss Langford.

Presently she came out of the schoolhouse.

When she appeared, two or three of the little girls jumped up and down, yelling, `` Goody, goody ''.

`` Let's play with 'em '', Jack said, rising from where he sat on the ground and dusting off his overall pants.

`` O.K. '' Charles rose also, and the two of them moved over to join the girls.

They played crack the whip a few minutes without mishap.

Then when Miss Langford was on the end of the line of girls, Jack, in the middle of the line, gave an extra hard pull and the young teacher sprawled backwards, sitting down hard, her dress flying over her head.

While she was struggling to get her skirt down and get on her feet again, Jack ran over, offered her his hand and said, `` Gosh, I'm sorry, Miss Langford.

I didn't mean to pull so hard ''.

`` That's all right '', she said, tossing her head back to get the hair out of her eyes.

`` It was my fault ''.

With one hand she held her skirt down while she took Jack's extended hand with the other.

When her hand touched his, fire went through Jack and he felt weak, but he managed somehow to get her on her feet.

He thought she gave him that look with the hidden something in it as he let her hand go.

`` Thank you '', she said, dusting herself off.

`` Will you play with us again, Miss Langford ''??

One of the little girls said.

`` No more today.

Maybe some other day ''.

`` Oh, shucks '', the girl said.

`` I don't believe I'll play any more neither ''.

`` Me neither '', others said, and soon the game broke up, the children going off in pairs, in larger groups and alone.

Jack walked off alone out the road in the searing midday sun, past Robert Allen's three-room, tarpapered house, toward the field where the other boys were playing ball, thinking of what he would do in order to make Miss Langford have him stay in after school -- because this was the day he had decided when he thought he saw the look in her eyes.

When he came back to the schoolhouse, his mind was made up.

He simply would not work his arithmetic problems when the teacher held his class.

That should do it, he thought, because Miss Langford had said she was going to be strict about school work.

He had considered throwing erasers or flipping paperwads at someone or pulling the hair of the girl sitting in front of him, but he couldn't take a chance on either of these possibilities: the teacher probably would make him stand face-to-wall in a corner instead of stay in after school.

The only drawback now to the plan he'd decided on was that someone else might fail to do his work, too, and the teacher would have that person stay late along with Jack.

`` But I've got to take a chance on it '', he told himself desperately.

To his surprise his plan worked perfectly.

`` All right, if you can't do your arithmetic during school hours you can do it after school is out '', Miss Langford said firmly, not smiling.

`` You will stay here thirty minutes after the others go home this afternoon and work your problems ''.

And so when the others stampeded out that afternoon Jack remained docilely in his seat near a window, looking out in what he hoped was a pitiable manner, while the other kids laughed and yelled in at him and made faces as they dispersed, going home.

He scarcely saw them.

His heart was pounding like a mighty dynamo and he was trying to think, his mind seeming to scream at him like a hurt or frightened child, `` How will I do it??

On the fringe of the amused throng of white onlookers stood a young woman of remarkable beauty and poise.

She munched little ginger cakes called mulatto's belly and kept her green, somewhat hypnotic eyes fixed on a light-colored male who was prancing wildly with a 5-foot king snake wrapped around his bronze neck.

The youth with the snake had a natural pride and joy of life which appealed to the woman.

Lithe and muscular, he had well-molded features, and his light color told of the European ancestors who had been intimate with the slave women of his family.

The haughty white girl turned to a distinguished, hawk-faced man standing at her side and murmured: `` Look at your watch, Col. Garvier.

It is almost time for and calinda to begin ''.

Col. Henri Garvier was one of New Orleans' most important and enlightened slave owners.

He chuckled and gave the signal for the dance to start.

The slaves ran gaily to the center of Congo Square and gathered around a sweaty youth they called Johnny No-Name.

Johnny vigorously pounded two bleached steer bones against the gourd which served as his drum.

He showed his gleaming tusks of teeth and bellowed incoherently, his brass earrings jangling discordantly as he shook and trembled in ecstasy.

The drummer flogged the gourd with frantic intensity as the dancers began the calinda, a sensual gyration which had long been a favorite of voodoo practitioners and their disciples in the Louisiana slave compounds.

The dance was of Haitian origin.

The white girl with the penetrating green eyes sipped the lemonade handed to her by a handsome man of about 30, who had coppery skin and beetling eyebrows.

He was possessive in his manner and, though a slave, obviously was educated after a fashion and imitated the manners of his owners.

He proudly wore the blue livery of her house, for the girl was Madame Delphine Lalaurie, wife of the prominent surgeon, Dr. Louis Lalaurie, who bore one of the South's oldest and most cherished names.

Delphine was a pace-setter in high society.

She was a top horsewoman and one of the city's most gracious hostesses.

Although New Orleans was not to learn of it for a spell, she also was a sadist, a nymphomaniac and unobtrusively mad -- the perpetrator of some of the worst crimes against humanity ever committed on American soil.

Madame Lalaurie gestured with her riding crop toward the 20-year-old youth who was stomping and writhing with the king snake still draped over his bare shoulders.

The slender, handsome fellow was called Dandy Brandon by the other slaves.

He was gifted with animal magnetism and a potent allure for women of any race.

But Dandy had had little experience with girls on his master's plantation in Bayou St. John.

Shy, actually, he avoided feminine overtures and seemed truly ignorant of the girls' desires when they sought to make liaisons with him in the open fields, in carriages and in boathouses.

This young slave was therefore quite unprepared when Delphine Lalaurie signaled that she wanted him to draw near.

The woman eyed the youth with the avidity a coin collector might display toward a rare doubloon which is not yet in his collection.

`` What is your name, boy??

Come a bit closer.

I won't bite, you know ''.

He gaped at Madame Lalaurie and sniffed the Paris perfume which emanated from her.

Then he smiled shyly.

`` My name is Dandy Brandon, missy.

I belong to Master Alexander Prieur ''.

She said with intense feeling: `` Come near, let me feel your arms.

You look quite strong and healthy to me, Dandy ''.

Mrs. Lalaurie impatiently propelled the slave toward her waiting carriage.

Lifting her skirts, she climbed in, never relinquishing her grip on his arm.

The woman seemed utterly unafraid of the snake which coiled on the floor in a torpor.

Once inside the luxuriosly-upholstered landau, she drew the curtains and proceeded to give the startled youth the kind of physical examination usually reserved for army inductees.

Satisfied at last, and after a few amorous gambits on her part which convinced Delphine that Dandy was capable of learning new arts, she opened the window and called to her liveried driver.

This was the big man with the proprietory air and the beetling, shaggy eyebrows.

`` Aristide!!

I want you to find Monsieur Prieur at once and give him this money for the boy's purchase.

There's $600 in gold in this chamois sack.

If the old fool argues about the price, tell him I shall order my husband not to treat him as a patient any longer.

Prieur has gout and depends on Louis' pills and bleedings.

Besides, he owns 300 slaves.

One less shouldn't matter to him ''.

Aristide Devol, the sardonic manservant who had been brought in chains years before from his native Sierra Leone, smiled thinly and touched his well-brushed beaver hat.

His bold eyes raked the woman, and a perceptive spectator might sense that there was more to their relationship than that of slave to owner.

`` Another youth, Madame ''??

The coachman said softly.

`` This one is a tender chicken, oui??

Such delicate beauty, such fine flesh.

It will rip and shred easily for Madame ''.

`` Be quiet, Devol!!

You are forgetting your place ''.

The tall coachman walked off briskly in search of Alexander Prieur.

Delphine Lalaurie took the reins in her gloved hands and drove Dandy Brandon -- cowering in the back seat of the carriage -- to her mansion at 677 Perdido Street.

Dr. Louis Lalaurie stood on the veranda at the head of the driveway and watched his carriage as it approached the pillared mansion.

Dandy, curiosity overcoming his apprehensions, peered out at the doctor from the window of the vehicle.

He saw a pint-sized man with a graying spade beard and an unusually large head.

Dr. Lalaurie wore a maroon smoking jacket, and his myopic eyes were blurry and glistened behind thick octagonal lenses.

He was about 50 years old.

`` Another young man, my dear??

Really, you are most indiscreet to drive him here yourself '', he said, frowning with displeasure.

Delphine presented her cheek for a kiss, and the physician pecked it like a timid rooster.

`` Dandy is to be our house guest, Louis.

I want the room in the attic prepared for him He is a most unusual lad, quite precocious in many ways.

He deserves a better life than just rotting away on the Prieur plantation ''.

`` Quite so, my dear.

His room will be ready shortly ''.

The physician led the horses to the stable after a cursory glance at the cringing slave.

Had Dandy been older or wiser, instinct might have warned him that he would be well advised to flee from the Lalauries' tender care if he valued his life.

But he liked the smell of Delphine's perfume.

Besides, her endearments and caresses in the carriage had been new and stirring experiences to the simple youth.

Also, he was weary of plantation drudgery and monotony.

So Dandy Brandon trustingly entered the house with Delphine Lalaurie and trudged up the rear steps to the attic room which was to be his new home.

Airless and dingy though it was, the attic represented luxury to a slave who had led a wretched life with six brothers and sisters and assorted relatives in a shanty at Bayou St. John.

He bounced exuberantly on the sagging bed and was even more delighted when Madame Lalaurie -- after closing the door -- showed the slave that the bed was designed for something other than slumber.

It was just as well that the ignorant Dandy enjoyed himself to the hilt that first evening, for the room was to become his prison cell.

When he finally left the sinister mansion on Perdido Street, he was carried out in a coroner's basket.

Just six weeks after Dandy Brandon's arrival at the mansion, the little surgeon and his svelte young wife gave their annual open house and ball, to which only New Orleans' oldest and wealthiest families were invited.

A stringed orchestra played softly behind the potted palms, and Delphine circulated graciously among her guests, chatting airily of the forthcoming races, the latest fashions from Paris, and Louisiana politics.

Suddenly there was a commotion upstairs, a despairing boyish shriek, and the strains of the waltz faltered and died as the musicians and guests gaped at an apparition descending the marble staircase.

It was Dandy Brandon, clad only in a bloody loincloth, emaciated and quaking as if the devil were breathing hard on him.

The lad's once superb body was a mass of scars and welts.

His pinched face showed the ravages of malnutrition.

Feebly he pointed an accusing finger at Madame Lalaurie and shouted: `` Evil woman!!

You did this you like to hurt to beat people I want to go home ''.

These were the last words he ever uttered.

Convulsively, he spat up some blood and collapsed into the arms of Senator Gaston Berche, crimsoning the frilly shirt and waistcoat the politician wore.

Dr. Louis Lalaurie examined the inert form of the slave on the parquet dance floor and pronounced him dead.

The ball broke up in confusion.

Guests stared with horror at Madame Lalaurie and made speedy departures.

Delphine stood like stone, her eyes alive with hate as she looked down at the sheeted corpse.

But at the coroner's inquest Delphine told a forthright story.

`` I saw the boy Dandy at the Congo Square festivities and felt sorry for him.

It was our hope to educate him and to give him his freedom when the right time came, for he was a bright and friendly youth who seemed worthy of our interest.

After I paid Monsieur Prieur for Dandy, I brought him home, but he was ill at ease and ran away the same night.

How he returned in such a ghastly condition, or why, I cannot say.

Dr. Lalaurie and I didn't even know he was in the house until the night of our ball when he came down the stairs ''.

She daubed at her swimming eyes with a lacy handkerchief and said with obvious emotion: `` That poor boy!!

He must have fallen in with evil companions, for he was a simple youth and quite trusting and inexperienced.

Ruffians must have robbed and beaten him before bringing him back to our house to die.

Such a pitiful end ''!!

Though the slave's dying words about the woman troubled the coroner's panel, Dandy's accusation was adjudged an aberration by the jury and disregarded.

The Lalauries were at the top rung of the social ladder, and even a jury didn't feel privileged to doubt the veracity of so illustrious a lady.

Moreover, runaway slaves frequently got into serious trouble in New Orleans' dives.

So the verdict was `` death at the hands of a person or persons unknown '', and the elite of the city, accepting Delphine's testimony, welcomed her and the doctor back into the fold.

Once again life went its serene way -- soirees, fox hunts, balls and dinners.

The excitement over Brandon's bizarre death abated and Madame Lalaurie's stock soared when she resumed her self-imposed chores of visiting the poor and bringing cakes and comfort to destitute patients in the county hospital.

Then, on July 2, there occurred another incident which set tongues to wagging at a furious clip.

Mrs. Victor Dominique, socially prominent and a neighbor of the Lalauries, chanced to glance out of her parlor window at dusk one evening and beheld an amazing sight.

The manservant Devol and his mistress, Delphine Lalaurie, were pursuing a young girl -- an octoroon of cameo-like beauty -- across the front lawn of the Lalaurie mansion.

The girl was not more than 16.

She was nude to the waist and her tumbled abundance of black hair did not conceal the knife slashes on her back.

The bleeding girl was tiring fast;;

the coachman and Delphine were gaining on her as she raced down Perdido Street.

The fugitive cried out in an oddly sibilant voice: `` Help me, somebody!!

They have pulled out all my teeth and now she will carve out my tongue with her hacksaw!!

`` Bastards '', he would say, `` all I did was put a beat to that Vivaldi stuff, and the first chair clobbered me ''!!

Since then, and since the pure grain had gotten him divorced from every decent -- and even indecent -- group from Greenwich Village to the Embarcadero, he had become a sucker-rolling freight-jumper.

`` There ain't nothin' faster, or lonelier, or more direct than a cannonball freight when you wanna go someplace '', Feathertop would say.

`` The accommodations may not be the poshest, but man!!

There ain't nobody askin' for your ticket stub, neither ''.

He had been conning the freights for a long, long time now.

Ever since the hooch, and the trouble with the Quartet, and Midge and the child.

Ever since all that.

It had been a very long time that had no form and no end.

He was -- as he told himself in the vernacular of a trade no longer his own -- riding the dark train out.

Out and out and never to return again.

Till one day the last freight had been jumped, the last pint had been killed, the last beat had been rapped.

That was the day it ended.

The freight car was cold, early in the morning.

He was pressed far back into the corner of the car on his hay sacks, the rattling and tinning of the wheels on the rails almost covering the sound of his ocarina.

He held his elbows away from his body, and the little sweet potato trilled neatly and sweetly as he tickled its tune-belly.

The train slowed at a road crossing, and the big door slid open;;

at first gratingly, caught by grains of corn -- then with a clash into its slot.

The boy lifted the girl by the waist and set her on the lip of the floor.

She pulled her legs up under her, to rise, her full peasant skirt drawing up her thighs, and Feathertop's music pfffted away.

`` Now that is a very nice, a very nice '', he murmured to himself, back in his corner.

A little thing, but the right twist for the action that counted.

Hot, that was the word, hot!!

Hair like a morning-frightened sparrow's wings, with the sun shining down over them.

A poet, yet!!

His thoughts for the swanlike neck, the full, high breasts, the slim waist, and the long legs were less than poetic, however.

Zingggg-O!!

Then the boy straight-armed himself up, twisting at the last moment so he landed sitting.

He was less to see, but Feathertop took him in, too, just to keep the records straight.

Curly hair, high cheekbones, wide gnomelike mouth, a pair of drummer's blocky hands, and a body that said well, maybe I can wrestle you for ten minutes -- but then I'm finished.

`` We made it, Cappy '', the chick said.

`` Yeah, seems so, don't it '', the boy laughed, hugging her close.

`` Ah-ah ''!!

Feathertop interrupted, standing up, brushing the pig offal from his dirty pants.

`` None of that.

We run a respectable house here ''.

They whirled and saw him, standing there dim in the slatted light from the boarded freight wall.

He was big, and filthy, and his toes stuck out of the flapping tops of his shoes.

He held the black plastic kazoo lightly.

`` Come sit '', said Feathertop, motioning them toward him.

`` That crap is softer over here ''.

The girl smiled, and started forward.

The boy yanked her back hard, tugging her off her feet, and gathered her into the crook of his arm.

`` Now stay with me, Kitty '', he snapped irritably.

`` I vowed to take care of you -- and that's what I'm gonna do.

We don't know this guy ''.

`` Oooo, square bit '', Feathertop screwed his face up.

This guy was strictly from Outsville.

But nowhere!!

`` What is with this vow jazz ''??

Feathertop inquired, lounging against the freight's vibrating wall.

`` We -- we eloped '', Cappy said.

His head came up and he said it defiantly.

`` Well, congratulations ''.

Feathertop made an elaborate motion with his hand.

These two were going to be easy pickins.

They couldn't have much dough, but then none of the freight-bums Feathertop rolled had much.

And besides, the chick had a little something the others didn't have.

That was gonna be fun collecting!!

But not just yet.

Feathertop was a connoisseur.

He liked to savor his meat before he tasted it.

`` Come sit '', he repeated, motioning to the piled hay bags, over the pig leavings.

`` I'm just a poor ex-jazz man, name of -- uh -- Boyd Smith ''.

He grinned at them wolfishly.

`` That ain't your name, Mister '', the boy accused.

`` And you know -- you're right ''!!

Feathertop aimed a finger at him.

`` Oh, come on, Cappy '', the girl chided.

`` He's okay.

He's a nice guy ''.

She started to move toward the hay bags, dragging the reluctant Cappy behind her.

Feathertop watched the smooth scissoring of her slim, trim legs as she walked to the bags, and tucked them beneath her, smoothing the skirt out in a wide circle.

He cleared his throat;;

it had been a long, hot while since he'd seen anything as nice as this within grabbin' distance.

He had it all doped, of course.

Slug the kid, grab his dough -- at least enough to get to Philadelphia -- and then have a rockin' ball with the doll.

Hmm -- diddle!!

`` Where'd you come from, Mr. -- uh -- Mr. Smith ''??

Kitty inquired politely.

`` Where from ''??

He mused.

`` Out.

I been riding train for a ways now ''.

They lapsed into silence, and the freight wallowed up a hill, scooted down the other side, shaking and clanking to itself.

After a while, Kitty murmured something to Cappy, and he held her close, answering, `` We'll just have to wait till we pull into Philly, honey ''.

`` What's the matter, she wanna go the bathroom ''??

Ernie found it immensely funny.

The boy scowled at him, and the girl looked shocked.

`` No!!

Certainly not, I mean, no that isn't what I said ''!!

She snapped at him.

`` I only said I was hungry.

We haven't had anything to eat all day ''.

Joviality suffused Feathertop Ernie Cargill's voice as he reached behind him, pulling out a battered carpet bag, with leather handles.

`` Whyn't ya say so, fellow travelers!!

Why, we got dinner right here.

C'mon, buddy, help me set up the kitchen and we'll have food in a minute or two ''.

Cappy looked wary, but he moved off the floorboards and followed the dirty ex-musician to the center of the refuse-littered boxcar.

Ernie crouched and opened the carpet bag.

He took out a small packet filled with bits of charcoal, a deep pot of thin metal, some sheets of newspaper, a book of matches and a wrinkled and many-times folded piece of tin foil with holes in it.

He put the charcoal in the pot, lit the paper with the matches, and carefully stretched the tin foil across the top of the pot.

`` A charcoal pit, man '', he said, indicating the slightly-smoking makeshift brazier.

`` Fan it '', he told Cappy, handing him a sheet of newspaper.

`` Yeah, but what're we gonna eat??

Charcoal ''??

`` Fella '', Ernie waggled a dirty finger at the younger man, `` you try my ever-lovin' patience ''.

He reached once more into the carpet bag and brought up a package of wieners.

`` Hot dogs, man.

Not the greatest, but they stick to your belly insides ''.

He ripped down the cellophane carefully, and laid three dogs on the tin foil.

Almost immediately they began to sizzle.

He looked up and grinned.

`` A Kroger's self-serve '', he explained.

`` I self-served ''.

When they had licked the last of the wieners' taste from their fingers, they settled back, and Cappy offered Ernie a cigarette.

Nice kid, Ernie thought, too bad.

`` How come you're riding the rods, kids like you ''??

Ernie asked.

Cappy looked down at his wide hands, and did not reply.

But surprisingly, Kitty's face came up and she said, `` My father.

He didn't want us to get married.

So we ran away ''.

`` Why didn't he want you to get hitched ''??

This time even she did not answer.

She looked down at her hands, too.

After a few seconds, she said, `` Dad didn't like Cappy.

It was my fault ''.

Cappy's head came around sharply.

`` Your fault, hell!!

It was all my fault.

If I'd been careful it never woulda '' -- he stopped abruptly.

Ernie's eyebrows went up.

`` What's the matter ''??

The girl still did not raise her eyes, but she added simply, `` I'm pregnant ''.

Cappy raged at himself.

`` Oh he was stupid, her old man!!

You never heard nothin' like it: Kitty's gonna go have an abortion, and Kitty's gonna go away to a convent, and Kitty's this and Kitty's that like he was nuts or somethin', y'know ''??

Ernie nodded.

This was a slightly different matter.

He remembered Midge, and the child.

But that had been a time before all this, a time he didn't think about.

A time before the white lightning and the bumming had turned him inside out.

But these kids weren't like him.

Oh crap!!

He thought, Pull out of it, old son.

These are just another couple of characters to roll.

What they got, you get.

Now forget all this other.

`` Wanna drink ''??

Ernie offered, taking the pint of sweet lucy from his jacket pocket.

`` Yeah.

Now that you offer ''.

The answer came from the open door of the boxcar.

From the man who had leaped in from the high bank outside, as the train had slowed on the grade.

Ernie stared at the man.

He was big.

Real big, with shoulders out to here, and hair all over him like a grizzly.

Road gang, Ernie thought.

`` You gonna give me a drink, fella ''??

The big man asked again, taking a step into the boxcar.

Ernie hesitated a moment.

This character could break him in half.

`` Sure '', he said, and lifted the pint to his own lips.

He guzzled down three-quarters of the strong home-blend and proffered the remainder.

The man stalked toward them, his big boots heavy on the wooden flooring.

He took the bottle with undue belligerence, and making sucking noises with his thick lips, drained it completely.

He threw his head back, closed his eyes, and belched ferociously.

He belched again, and opening his eyes, threw the bottle out the open door.

`` Well, now '', he said, and reached into his pocket.

`` I didn't know I was gonna have company in this car ''.

`` We're going to Philadelphia '', Kitty said, pulling her skirt down around her legs all the more.

`` No, I don't think so '', said the big man, and it was the final clincher for Ernie.

He had suspected this guy was trouble, and now he was sure of it.

`` Maybe you and me will, girlie, but these two ain't goin' nowhere ''.

He advanced on them, and abruptly there was a shocked electricity in the car.

Ernie was screaming inside himself: No, damn you, you ain't gonna take my meal ticket away from me!!

The newcomer stalked toward them, and Kitty shied back, her hand to her mouth.

Her scream split up the silence of the car, accompanied by the rattling of the freight, and then Cappy came off the floor, his legs driving him hard.

The kid hit the bigger man with an audible thwump!!

And carried him backward in a footballer's tackle.

They went down in a heap and for a long minute there was nothing to see but flailing arms and legs.

The kid showed for an instant, and his arm was cocked back.

The fist went down into the pile of flesh, and Ernie heard the bigger man's deeper voice go, `` Aaawww ''!!

Then they were tumbling again, and the big man reached into the same pocket he had gone for earlier, and came up with a vicious switchblade.

He held the knife aloft an instant -- an instant enough to press the stud.

The blade came out with a snick!!

He fisted the knife overhand, and drew back to plunge it into the kid's throat.

Kitty screamed insanely and her face was white.

She grabbed at Feathertop's sleeve and shrieked, `` Help him!!

Help him!!

Do something ''!!

Now that he knew himself to be self he was free to grok ever closer to his brothers, merge without let.

Self's integrity was and is and ever had been.

Mike stopped to cherish all his brother selves, the many threes-fulfilled on Mars, corporate and discorporate, the precious few on Earth -- the unknown powers of three on Earth that would be his to merge with and cherish now that at last long waiting he grokked and cherished himself.

Mike remained in trance;;

there was much to grok, loose ends to puzzle over and fit into his growing -- all that he had seen and heard and been at the Archangel Foster Tabernacle( not just cusp when he and Digby had come face to face alone) why Bishop Senator Boone made him warily uneasy, how Miss Dawn Ardent tasted like a water brother when she was not, the smell of goodness he had incompletely grokked in the jumping up and down and wailing --

Jubal's conversations coming and going -- Jubal's words troubled him most;;

he studied them, compared them with what he had been taught as a nestling, struggling to bridge between languages, the one he thought with and the one he was learning to think in.

The word `` church '' which turned up over and over again among Jubal's words gave him knotty difficulty;;

there was no Martian concept to match it -- unless one took `` church '' and `` worship '' and `` God '' and `` congregation '' and many other words and equated them to the totality of the only world he had known during growing-waiting then forced the concept back into English in that phrase which had been rejected( by each differently) by Jubal, by Mahmoud, by Digby.

`` Thou art God ''.

He was closer to understanding it in English now, although it could never have the inevitability of the Martian concept it stood for.

In his mind he spoke simultaneously the English sentence and the Martian word and felt closer grokking.

Repeating it like a student telling himself that the jewel is in the lotus he sank into nirvana.

Before midnight he speeded his heart, resumed normal breathing, ran down his check list, uncurled and sat up.

He had been weary;;

now he felt light and gay and clear-headed, ready for the many actions he saw spreading out before him.

He felt a puppyish need for company as strong as his earlier necessity for quiet.

He stepped out into the hall, was delighted to encounter a water brother.

`` Hi ''!!

`` Oh.

Hello, Mike.

My, you look chipper ''.

`` I feel fine!!

Where is everybody ''??

`` Asleep.

Ben and Stinky went home an hour ago and people started going to bed ''.

`` Oh ''.

Mike felt disappointed that Mahmoud had left;;

he wanted to explain his new grokking.

`` I ought to be asleep, too, but I felt like a snack.

Are you hungry ''??

`` Sure, I'm hungry ''!!

`` Come on, there's some cold chicken and we'll see what else ''.

They went downstairs, loaded a tray lavishly.

`` Let's take it outside.

It's plenty warm ''.

`` A fine idea '', Mike agreed.

`` Warm enough to swim -- real Indian summer.

I'll switch on the floods ''.

`` Don't bother '', Mike answered.

`` I'll carry the tray ''.

He could see in almost total darkness.

Jubal said that his night-sight probably came from the conditions in which he had grown up, and Mike grokked this was true but grokked that there was more to it;;

his foster parents had taught him to see.

As for the night being warm, he would have been comfortable naked on Mount Everest but his water brothers had little tolerance for changes in temperature and pressure;;

he was considerate of their weakness, once he learned of it.

But he was looking forward to snow -- seeing for himself that each tiny crystal of the water of life was a unique individual, as he had read -- walking barefoot, rolling in it.

In the meantime he was pleased with the warm night and the still more pleasing company of his water brother.

`` Okay, take the tray.

I'll switch on the underwater lights.

That'll be plenty to eat by ''.

`` Fine ''.

Mike liked having light up through the ripples;;

it was a goodness, beauty.

They picnicked by the pool, then lay back on the grass and looked at stars.

`` Mike, there's Mars.

It is Mars, isn't it??

Or Antares ''??

`` It is Mars ''.

`` Mike??

What are they doing on Mars ''??

He hesitated;;

the question was too wide for the sparse English language.

`` On the side toward the horizon -- the southern hemisphere -- it is spring;;

plants are being taught to grow ''.

``' Taught to grow' ''??

He hesitated.

`` Larry teaches plants to grow.

I have helped him.

But my people -- Martians, I mean;;

I now grok you are my people -- teach plants another way.

In the other hemisphere it is growing colder and nymphs, those who stayed alive through the summer, are being brought into nests for quickening and more growing ''.

He thought.

`` Of the humans we left at the equator, one has discorporated and the others are sad ''.

Yes, I heard it in the news ''.

Mike had not heard it;;

he had not known it until asked.

`` They should not be sad.

Mr. Booker T. W. Jones Food Technician First Class is not sad;;

the Old Ones have cherished him ''.

`` You knew him ''??

`` Yes.

He had his own face, dark and beautiful.

But he was homesick ''.

`` Oh, dear!!

Mike do you ever get homesick??

For Mars ''??

`` At first I was homesick '', he answered.

`` I was lonely always ''.

He rolled toward her and took her in his arms.

`` But now I am not lonely.

I grok I shall never be lonely again ''.

`` Mike darling '' -- They kissed, and went on kissing.

Presently his water brother said breathlessly.

`` Oh, my!!

That was almost worse than the first time ''.

`` You are all right, my brother ''??

`` Yes.

Yes indeed.

Kiss me again ''.

A long time later, by cosmic clock, she said, `` Mike??

Is that -- I mean,' Do you know' '' --

`` I know.

It is for growing closer.

Now we grow closer ''.

`` Well I've been ready a long time -- goodness, we all have, but never mind, dear;;

turn just a little.

I'll help ''.

As they merged, grokking together, Mike said softly and triumphantly: `` Thou art God ''.

Her answer was not in words.

Then, as their grokking made them ever closer and Mike felt himself almost ready to discorporate her voice called him back: `` Oh!!

Oh!!

Thou art God ''!!

`` We grok God ''.

25.

On Mars humans were building pressure domes for the male and female party that would arrive by next ship.

This went faster than scheduled as the Martians were helpful.

Part of the time saved was spent on a preliminary estimate for a long-distance plan to free bound oxygen in the sands of Mars to make the planet more friendly to future human generations.

The Old Ones neither helped nor hindered this plan;;

time was not yet.

Their meditations were approaching a violent cusp that would shape Martian art for many millennia.

On Earth elections continued and a very advanced poet published a limited edition of verse consisting entirely of punctuation marks and spaces;;

Time magazine reviewed it and suggested that the Federation Assembly Daily Record should be translated into the medium.

A colossal campaign opened to sell more sexual organs of plants and Mrs. Joseph( `` Shadow of Greatness '') Douglas was quoted as saying: `` I would no more sit down without flowers on my table than without serviettes ''.

A Tibetan swami from Palermo, Sicily, announced in Beverly Hills a newly discovered, ancient yoga discipline for ripple breathing which increased both pranha and cosmic attraction between sexes.

His chelas were required to assume the matsyendra posture dressed in hand-woven diapers while he read aloud from Rig-Veda and an assistant guru examined their purses in another room -- nothing was stolen;;

the purpose was less immediate.

The President of the United States proclaimed the first Sunday in November as `` National Grandmothers' Day '' and urged America to say it with flowers.

A funeral parlor chain was indicted for price-cutting.

Fosterite bishops, after secret conclave, announced the Church's second Major Miracle: Supreme Bishop Digby had been translated bodily to Heaven and spot-promoted to Archangel, ranking with-but-after Archangel Foster.

The glorious news had been held up pending Heavenly confirmation of the elevation of a new Supreme Bishop, Huey Short -- a candidate accepted by the Boone faction after lots had been cast repeatedly.

L'Unita and Hoy published identical denunciations of Short's elevation, l'Osservatore Romano and the Christian Science Monitor ignored it, Times of India snickered at it, and the Manchester Guardian simply reported it -- the Fosterites in England were few but extremely militant.

Digby was not pleased with his promotion.

The Man from Mars had interrupted him with his work half finished -- and that stupid jackass Short was certain to louse it up.

Foster listened with angelic patience until Digby ran down, then said, `` Listen, junior, you're an angel now -- so forget it.

Eternity is no time for recriminations.

You too were a stupid jackass until you poisoned me.

Afterwards you did well enough.

Now that Short is Supreme Bishop he'll do all right, he can't help it.

Same as with the Popes.

Some of them were warts until they got promoted.

Check with one of them, go ahead -- there's no professional jealousy here ''.

Digby calmed down, but made one request.

Foster shook his halo.

`` You can't touch him.

You shouldn't have tried to.

Oh, you can submit a requisition for a miracle if you want to make a fool of yourself.

But, I'm telling you, it'll be turned down -- you don't understand the System yet.

The Martians have their own setup, different from ours, and as long as they need him, we can't touch him.

They run their show their way -- the Universe has variety, something for everybody -- a fact you field workers often miss ''.

`` You mean this punk can brush me aside and I've got to hold still for it ''??

`` I held still for the same thing, didn't I??

I'm helping you now, am I not??

Now look, there's work to be done and lots of it.

The Boss wants performance, not gripes.

If you need a Day off to calm down, duck over to the Muslim Paradise and take it.

Otherwise, straighten your halo, square your wings, and dig in.

The sooner you act like an angel the quicker you'll feel angelic.

Get Happy, junior ''!!

Digby heaved a deep ethereal sigh.

`` Okay, I'm Happy.

Where do I start ''??

Jubal did not hear of Digby's disappearance when it was announced, and, when he did, while he had a fleeting suspicion, he dismissed it;;

if Mike had had a finger in it, he had gotten away with it -- and what happened to supreme bishops worried Jubal not at all as long as he wasn't bothered.

His household had gone through an upset.

Jubal deduced what had happened but did not know with whom -- and didn't want to inquire.

Mike was of legal age and presumed able to defend himself in the clinches.

Anyhow, it was high time the boy was salted.

Jubal couldn't reconstruct the crime from the way the girls behaved because patterns kept shifting -- ABC vs D, then BCD vs A or AB vs CD, or AD vs CB, through all ways that four women can gang up on each other.

This continued most of the week following that ill-starred trip to church, during which period Mike stayed in his room and usually in a trance so deep that Jubal would have pronounced him dead had he not seen it before.

Jubal would not have minded it if service had not gone to pieces.

The girls seemed to spend half their time tiptoeing in `` to see if Mike was all right '' and they were too preoccupied to cook, much less be secretaries.

Even rock-steady Anne -- Hell, Anne was the worst!!

Absent-minded, subject to unexplained tears Jubal would have bet his life that if Anne were to witness the Second Coming, she would memorize date, time, personae, events, and barometric pressure without batting her calm blue eyes.

The expense and time involved are astronomical.

However, we sent a third vessel out, a much smaller and faster one than the first two.

We have learned much about interstellar drives since a hundred years ago;;

that is all I can tell you about them.

`` But the third ship came back several years ago and reported ''

`` That it had found a planet on which human beings could live and which was already inhabited by sentient beings ''!!

Said Hal, forgetting in his enthusiasm that he had not been asked to speak.

Macneff stopped pacing to stare at Hal with his pale blue eyes.

`` How did you know ''??

He said sharply.

`` Forgive me, Sandalphon '', said Hal.

`` But it was inevitable!!

Did not the Forerunner predict in his Time and the World Line that such a planet would be found??

I believe it was on page 573 ''!!

Macneff smiled and said, `` I am glad that your scriptural lessons have left such an impression ''.

How could they not??

Thought Hal.

Besides, they were not the only impressions.

I still bear scars on my back where Pornsen, my gapt, whipped me because I had not learned my lessons well enough.

He was a good impresser, that Pornsen.

Was??

Is!!

As I grew older and was promoted, so was he, always where I was.

He was my gapt in the creche.

He was the dormitory gapt when I went to college and thought I was getting away from him.

He is now my block gapt.

He is the one responsible for my getting such low M. R.'s.

Swiftly, came the revulsion, the protest.

No, not he, for I, and I alone, am responsible for whatever happens to me.

If I get a low M. R., I do so because I want it that way or my dark self does.

If I die, I die because I willed it so.

So, forgive me, Sigmen, for the contrary-to-reality thoughts!!

`` Please pardon me again, Sandalphon '', said Hal.

`` But did the expedition find any records of the Forerunner having been on this planet??

Perhaps, even, though this is too much to wish, find the Forerunner himself ''??

`` No '', said Macneff.

`` Though that does not mean that there may not be such records there.

The expedition was under orders to make a swift survey of conditions and then to return to Earth.

I can't tell you now the distance in lightyears or what star this was, though you can see it with the naked eye at night in this hemisphere.

If you volunteer, you will be told where you're going after the ship leaves.

And it leaves very soon ''.

`` You need a linguist ''??

Said Hal.

`` The ship is huge '', said Macneff, `` but the number of military men and specialists we are taking limits the linguists to one.

We have considered several of your professionals because they were lamechians and above suspicion.

Unfortunately ''

Hal waited: Macneff paced some more, frowning.

Then, he said, `` Unfortunately, only one lamechian linguist exists, and he is too old for this expedition.

Therefore ''

`` A thousand pardons '', said Hal.

`` But I have just thought of one thing.

I am married ''.

`` No problem at all '', said Macneff.

`` There will be no women aboard the Gabriel.

And, if a man is married, he will automatically be given a divorce ''.

Hal gasped, and he said, `` A divorce ''??

Macneff raised his hands apologetically and said, `` You are horrified, of course.

But, from our reading of the Western Talmud, we Urielites believe that the Forerunner, knowing this situation would arise, made reference to and provision for divorce.

It's inevitable in this case, for the couple will be separated for, at the least, forty years.

Naturally, he couched the provision in obscure language.

In his great and glorious wisdom, he knew that our enemies the Israelites must not be able to read therein what we planned ''.

`` I volunteer '', said Hal.

`` Tell me more, Sandalphon ''.

Six months later, Hal Yarrow stood in the observation dome of the Gabriel and watched the ball of Earth dwindle above him.

It was night on this hemisphere, but the light blazed from the megalopolises of Australia, Japan, China, Southeast Asia, India, Siberia.

Hal, the linguist, saw the glittering discs and necklaces in terms of the languages spoken therein.

Australia, the Philippine Islands, Japan, and northern China were inhabited by those members of the Haijac Union that spoke American.

Southern China, all of southeast Asia, southern India and Ceylon, these states of the Malay Federation spoke Bazaar.

Siberia spoke Icelandic.

His mind turned the globe swiftly for him, and he visualized Africa, which used Swahili south of the Sahara Sea.

All around the Mediterranean Sea, Asia Minor, northern India, and Tibet, Hebrew was the native tongue.

In southern Europe, between the Israeli Republics and the Icelandic-speaking peoples of northern Europe, was a thin but long stretch of territory called March.

This was no man's land, disputed by the Haijac Union and the Israeli Republic, a potential source of war for the last two hundred years.

Neither nation would give up their claim on it, yet neither wished to make any move that might lead to a second Apocalyptic War.

So, for all practical purposes, it was an independent nation and by now had its own organized government( unrecognized outside its own borders).

Its citizens spoke all of the world's surviving tongues, plus a new one called Lingo, a pidgin whose vocabulary was derived from the other six and whose syntax was so simple it could be contained on half a sheet of paper.

Hal saw in his mind the rest of Earth: Iceland, Greenland, the Caribbean Islands, and the eastern half of South America.

Here the peoples spoke the tongue of Iceland because that island had gotten the jump on the Hawaiian-Americans who were busy resettling North America and the western half of South America after the Apocalyptic War.

Then there was North America, where American was the native speech of all except the twenty descendants of French-Canadians living on the Hudson Bay Preserve.

Hal knew that when that side of Earth rotated into the night zone, Sigmen City would blaze out into space.

And, somewhere in that enormous light, was his apartment.

But Mary would soon no longer be living there, for she would be notified in a few days that her husband had died in an accident while on a flight to Tahiti.

She would weep in private, he was sure, for she loved him in her frigid way, though in public she would be dry-eyed.

Her friends and professional associates would sympathize with her, not because she had lost a beloved husband, but because she had been married to a man who thought unrealistically.

If Hal Yarrow had been killed in a crash, he must have wanted it that way.

There was no such thing as an `` accident ''.

Somehow, all the other passengers( also supposed to have died in this web of elaborate frauds to cover up the disappearance of the personnel of the Gabriel) had simultaneously `` agreed '' to die.

And, therefore, being in disgrace, they would not be cremated and their ashes flung to the winds in public ceremony.

No, the fish could eat their bodies for all the Sturch cared.

Hal felt sorry for Mary;;

he had a time keeping the tears from welling to his own eyes as he stood in the crowd in the observation dome.

Yet, he told himself, this was the best way.

He and Mary would no longer have to tear and rend at each other;;

their mutual torture would be over.

Mary was free to marry again, not knowing that the Sturch had secretly given her a divorce, thinking that death had dissolved her marriage.

She would have a year in which to make up her mind, to choose a mate from a list selected by her gapt.

Perhaps, the psychological barriers that had prevented her from conceiving Hal's child would no longer be present.

Perhaps.

Hal doubted if this happy event would occur.

Mary was as frozen below the navel as he.

No matter who the candidate for marriage selected by the gapt

The gapt.

Pornsen.

He would no longer have to see that fat face, hear that whining voice

`` Hal Yarrow ''!!

Said the whining voice.

And, slowly, feeling himself icy yet burning, Hal turned.

There was the squat loose-jowled man, smiling lopsidedly up at him.

`` My beloved ward, my perennial gadfly '', said the whining voice.

`` I had no idea that you, too, would be on this glorious voyage.

But I might have known!!

We seem to be bound by love;;

Sigmen himself must have foreseen it.

Love to you, my ward ''.

`` Sigmen love you, too, my guardian '', said Hal, choking.

`` How wonderful to see your cherished self.

I had thought we would never again speak to each other ''.

5

the Gabriel pointed towards her destination and, under one-gee acceleration, began to build up towards her ultimate velocity, 99.1 percent of the speed of light.

Meanwhile, all the personnel except those few needed to carry out the performance of the ship, went into the suspensor.

Here they would lie in suspended animation for many years.

Some time later, after a check had been made of all automatic equipment, the crew would join the others.

They would sleep while the Gabriel's drive would increase the acceleration to a point which the unfrozen bodies of the personnel could not have endured.

Upon reaching the desired speed, the automatic equipment would cut off the drive, and the silent but not empty vessel would hurl towards the star which was its journey's end.

Many years later, the photon-counting apparatus in the nose of the ship would determine that the star was close enough to actuate deceleration.

Again, a force too strong for unfrozen bodies to endure would be applied.

Then, after slowing the vessel considerably, the drive would adjust to a one-gee deceleration.

And the crew would be automatically brought out of their suspended animation.

These members would then unthaw the rest of the personnel.

And, in the half-year left before reaching their destination, the men would carry out whatever preparations were needed.

Hal Yarrow was among the last to go into the suspensor and among the first to come out.

He had to study the recordings of the language of the chief nation of Ozagen, Siddo.

And, from the first, he faced a difficult task.

The expedition that had discovered Ozagen had succeeded in correlating two thousand Siddo words with an equal number of American words.

The description of the Siddo syntax was very restricted.

And, as Hal found out, obviously mistaken in many cases.

This discovery caused Hal anxiety.

His duty was to write a school text and to teach the entire personnel of the Gabriel how to speak Ozagen.

Yet, if he used all of the little means at his disposal, he would be instructing his students wrongly.

Moreover, even getting this across would be difficult.

For one thing, the organs of speech of the Ozagen natives differed somewhat from Earthmen's;;

the sounds made by these organs were, therefore, dissimilar.

It was true that they could be approximated, but would the Ozagenians understand these approximations??

Another obstacle was the grammatical construction of Siddo.

Consider the tense system.

Instead of inflecting a verb or using an unattached particle to indicate the past or future, Siddo used an entirely different word.

Thus, the masculine animate infinitive dabhumaksanigalu'ahai, meaning to live, was, in the perfect tense, ksu'u'peli'afo, and, in the future, mai'teipa.

The same use of an entirely different word applied for all the other tenses.

Plus the fact that Siddo not only had the normal( to Earthmen) three genders of masculine, feminine, and neuter, but the two extra of inanimate and spiritual.

Fortunately, gender was inflected, though the expression of it would be difficult for anybody not born in Siddo.

The system of indicating gender varied according to tense.

All the other parts of speech: nouns, pronouns, adjectives, adverbs, and conjunctions operated under the same system as the verbs.

This was not, for the Angel, just a matter of running through a logical or deductive chain, or deciding on some action from some already established premise.

No doubt the Angels could do that kind of thing as fast as any computer.

What Gabriel was being asked to do now, however, was to re-examine all his basic assumptions, make value-judgments on them, and give them new and different powers in his mind to govern his motives.

This is not wholly a reasoning process -- a computer cannot do it all -- and even in an Angel it takes time.

( Or, perhaps, especially in an Angel, whose assumptions had mostly been fixed millions of years ago.

)

Being reasonably sure of the reason for the long pause, however, did not make it seem any less long to Jack.

He had already become used to Hesperus' snapping back answers to questions almost before Jack could get them asked.

There was nothing he could do but wait.

The dice were cast.

At last Gabriel spoke.

`` We misjudged you '', he said slowly.

`` We had concluded that no race as ephemeral as yours could have had time to develop a sense of justice.

Of course we have before us the example of the great races at the galactic center;;

individually they are nearly as mortal as you -- the difference does not seem very marked to us, where it exists.

But they have survived for long periods as races, whereas you are young.

We shall recommend to them that they shorten your trial period by half.

`` For now, it is clear that we were in the wrong.

You may reclaim your property, and the penalty on Hesperus is lifted.

Hesperus, you may speak ''.

`` I did not perceive this essential distinction either, First-Born '', Hesperus said at once, `` I was only practicing a concept that Jack taught me, called a deal ''.

`` Nevertheless, you were its agent.

Jack, what is the nature of this concept ''??

`` It's a kind of agreement in which each party gives something to the other '', Jack said.

`` We regard it as fair only when each party feels that what he has received is as valuable, or more valuable, than what he has given ''.

His heart, he discovered, was pounding.

`` For instance, Hesperus agreed to help me find my property, and I agreed to take him to Earth.

Between individuals, this process is called bargaining.

When it is done between races or nations, it is called making a treaty.

And the major part of my mission to your nest is to make a treaty between your race and mine.

Recovering the property was much less important ''.

`` Strange '', Gabriel said.

`` And apparently impossible.

Though it might be that we would have much to give you, you have nothing to give us ''.

`` Hesperus and Lucifer '', Jack said, `` show that we do ''.

Another pause;;

but this one was not nearly as long.

`` Then it is a matter of pleasure;;

of curiosity;;

of a more alive time.

Yes, those could be commodities under this concept.

But you should understand, Jack, that Hesperus and Lucifer are not long out of the nursery.

Visiting the Earth would not be an offering of worth to those of us who are older ''.

This explained a great deal.

`` All the more reason, then '', Jack said, `` why we must have a treaty.

We will gladly entertain your young and give them proper living quarters, in return for their help in running our fusion reactors.

But we must know if this is in accordance with your customs, and must have your agreement they will not misuse the power we put in their hands, to our hurt ''.

`` But this simply requires that they behave in accordance with the dictates of their own natures, and respect yours in turn.

To this we of course agree ''.

Jack felt a wave of complete elation, but in a second it had vanished without a trace.

What Gabriel was asking was that mankind forego all its parochial moral judgments, and contract to let the Angels serve on Earth as it is in Heaven regardless of the applicable Earth laws.

The Angels in turn would exercise similar restraints in respect for the natural preferences and natures of the Earthmen -- but they had no faintest notion of man's perverse habit of passing and enforcing laws which were contrary to his own preferences and violations of his nature.

The simple treaty principle that Gabriel was asking him to ratify, in short, was nothing less than total trust.

Nothing less would serve.

And it might be, considering the uncomfortable custom the Angels had of thinking of everything in terms of absolutes, that the proposal of anything less might well amount instead to something like a declaration of war.

Furthermore, even the highly trained law clerk who was a part of Jack's total make-up could not understand how the principle could ever be codified.

Almost the whole experience of mankind pointed toward suspicion, not trust, as the safest and sanest attitude toward all outsiders.

Yet there was some precedent for it.

The history of disarmament agreements, for instance, had been unreassuringly dismal;;

but the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics nevertheless did eventually agree on an atomic bomb test ban, and a sort of provisional acceptance of each other's good intentions on this limited question.

Out of that agreement, though not by any easy road, eventually emerged the present world hegemony of the United Nations;;

suspicion between member states still existed, but it was of about the same low order of virulence as the twentieth-century rivalry between Arizona and California over water supplies.

Besides, agreements `` in principle '', with the petty details to be thrashed out later, were commonplace in diplomatic history.

The trouble with them was that they almost never worked, and in fact an agreement `` in principle '' historically turned out to be a sure sign that neither party really wanted the quarrel settled.

Suppose that this one were to work??

There was no question in Jack's mind of the good faith on one side, at least.

If mankind could be convinced of that

It was worth trying.

In fact, it had to be tried.

It would be at once the most tentative and most final treaty that Earth had ever signed.

Secretary Hart had taught Jack, at least partially, to be content with small beginnings in all diplomatic matters;;

but there was no small way to handle this one.

He turned back to the screens, the crucial, conclusive phrase on his lips.

But he was too late.

He had lost his audience.

For a moment he could make no sense at all of what he saw.

It seemed to be only a riot of color, light and meaningless activity.

Gradually, he realized that the pentagon of Angel elders had vanished, and that the ritual learning dance of the nursery had been broken up.

The Angels in the nursery were zigzagging wildly in all directions, seemingly at random.

`` Hesperus!!

What's going on here??

What's happened ''??

`` Your brothers have been found.

They are on their way here ''.

`` Where??

I don't see them.

The instruments don't show them ''.

`` You can't see them yet, Jack.

They'll be in range in a short while ''.

Jack scanned the skies, the boards, and the skies again.

Nothing.

No -- there was a tiny pip on the radar;;

and it was getting bigger rapidly.

If that was the skiff, it was making unprecedented speed.

Then the skiff hove into sight, just a dot of light at first against the roiling blackness and crimson streaks of the Coal Sack.

Through the telescope, Jack could see that both spacesuits were still attached to it.

The sail was still unfurled, though there were a good many holes in it, as Langer had predicted would be the case by now.

It was a startling, almost numenous sight;;

but even more awesome was the fact that it was trailing an enormous comet's-tail of Angels.

The skiff was not heading for the nursery, however.

It seemed unlikely that her crew, if either of them were alive, could even see the Ariadne, for they were passing her at a distance of nearly a light-year.

And there would be no chance of signaling them -- without the Nernst generator Jack could not send a call powerful enough to get through all the static, and by the time he could rebuild his fusion power the skiff would be gone.

Fuming, helpless, he watched them pass him.

The sail, ragged though it was, still had enough surface to catch some of the ocean of power being poured out from the nursery stars.

He would never have believed, without seeing it, that the bizarre little vessel could go so fast.

But where was it going??

And why was it causing so much agitation among the Angels, and being followed by so many of them??

There was only one possible answer, but Jack's horrified mind refused to believe it until he had fed the radar plots of the skiff's course into the computer.

The curve on the card the computer spat back at him couldn't be argued with, however.

The skiff was headed for the very center of the nebula -- toward that place which, Jack knew now, could hold nothing less important than the very core of the Angel's life and religion.

It was clear that Langer had at last found a way to attract the Angel's attention.

It was equally clear that as of this moment, the treaty was off.

Stern chase 10

Langer would have to be headed off, whether he knew where he was going or not.

Almost surely he did;;

after all, he had had the same set of facts as Jack had had to work from, and he was an almost frighteningly observant man.

But not having talked to the Angels, he had made a wrong turn in his reasoning somewhere along the line.

Had he decided, perhaps, that the center of the cloud was a center of government, instead of a center of life and faith ''??

But it didn't matter now whether he meant to invade the Holy of Holies, or was simply headed in that direction by accident.

If it was intentional, it was now also unnecessary;;

and whether intentional or not, the outcome would be disastrous.

Jack crawled under the boards and restored the six feet of lead line he had excised from the Nernst generator switch.

When he was back on his feet again and about to reinstall the fuses, however, he hesitated.

He had to have fusion power to catch up with the skiff, and he had to have it fast.

But fusion power in the Coal Sack was what had triggered all the trouble in the first place -- and he already had an Angel aboard.

`` Hesperus ''??

`` Receiving ''.

`` I'm going to turn my generator back on, as I promised to do.

But I can't take you to Earth yet.

First I've got to intercept my brothers before they get any deeper into trouble.

Will you obstruct this, or will you help??

I know it's not part of the bargain, and your elders might not like it ''.

`` Nobody else can live in your hearth while I am in it '', Hesperus said promptly.

`` As for my elders, they have already admitted that they were wrong.

If because of this incident they become angry with Earth, I will not be permitted to go there at all.

Therefore of course I will help ''.

With a short-lived sigh of relief, Jack plugged the fuses back in and threw the switch.

Without an instant's transition, the green light that meant full fusion power winked on the board.

Always before, it had taken five minutes to --

Of course.

Hesperus was in there.

From here on out, the Ariadne was going to be hotter than any space cruiser man had ever dreamed of.

But since he had failed to anticipate it, he lost the five minutes anyhow, in plotting an intercept orbit.

`` Hesperus, don't use this t-tau vector trick of yours, please.

Ryan hefted his bulk up and supported it on one elbow.

He rubbed his eyes sleepily with one huge paw.

`` Ekstrohm, Nogol, you guys okay ''??

`` Nothing wrong with me that couldn't be cured '', Nogol said.

He didn't say what would cure him;;

he had been explaining all during the trip what he needed to make him feel like himself.

His small black eyes darted inside the olive oval of his face.

`` Ekstrohm ''??

Ryan insisted.

`` Okay ''.

`` Well, let's take a ground-level look at the country around here ''.

The facsiport rolled open on the landscape.

A range of bluffs hugged the horizon, the color of decaying moss.

Above them, the sky was the black of space, or the almost equal black of the winter sky above Minneapolis, seen against neon-lit snow.

That cold, empty sky was full of fire and light.

It seemed almost a magnification of the Galaxy itself, of the Milky Way, blown up by some master photographer.

This fiery swath was actually only a belt of minor planets, almost like the asteroid belt in the original Solar System.

These planets were much bigger, nearly all capable of holding an atmosphere.

But to the infuriation of scientists, for no known reason not all of them did.

This would be the fifth mapping expedition to the planetoids of Yancy-6 in three generations.

They lay months away from the nearest Earth star by jump drive, and no one knew what they were good for, although it was felt that they would probably be good for something if it could only be discovered -- much like the continent of Antarctica in ancient history.

`` How can a planet with so many neighbors be so lonely ''??

Ryan asked.

He was the captain, so he could ask questions like that.

`` Some can be lonely in a crowd '', Nogol said elaborately.

`` What will we need outside, Ryan ''??

Ekstrohm asked.

`` No helmets '', the captain answered.

`` We can breathe out there, all right.

It just won't be easy.

This old world lost all of its helium and trace gases long ago.

Nitrogen and oxygen are about it ''.

`` Ryan, look over there '', Nogol said.

`` Animals.

Ringing the ship.

Think they're intelligent, maybe hostile ''??

`` I think they're dead '', Ekstrohm interjected quietly.

`` I get no readings from them at all.

Sonic, electronic, galvanic -- all blank.

According to these needles, they're stone dead ''.

`` Ekstrohm, you and I will have a look '', Ryan said.

`` You hold down the fort, Nogol.

Take it easy ''.

`` Easy '', Nogol confirmed.

`` I heard a story once about a rookie who got excited when the captain stepped outside and he couldn't get an encephalographic reading on him.

Me, I know the mind of an officer works in a strange and unfathomable manner ''.

`` I'm not worried about you mis-reading the dials, Nogol, just about a lug like you reading them at all.

Remember, when the little hand is straight up that's negative.

Positive results start when it goes towards the hand you use to make your mark ''.

`` But I'm ambidextrous ''.

Ryan told him what he could do then.

Ekstrohm smiled, and followed the captain through the airlock with only a glance at the lapel gauge on his coverall.

The strong negative field his suit set up would help to repel bacteria and insects.

Actually, the types of infection that could attack a warm-blooded mammal were not infinite, and over the course of the last few hundred years adequate defenses had been found for all basic categories.

He wasn't likely to come down with hot chills and puzzling striped fever.

They ignored the ladder down to the planet surface and, with only a glance at the seismological gauge to judge surface resistance, dropped to the ground.

It was day, but in the thin atmosphere contrasts were sharp between light and shadow.

They walked from midnight to noon, noon to midnight, and came to the beast sprawled on its side.

Ekstrohm nudged it with a boot.

`` Hey, this is pretty close to a wart-hog ''.

`` Uh-huh '', Ryan admitted.

`` One of the best matches I've ever found.

Well, it has to happen.

Statistical average and all.

Still, it sometimes gives you a creepy feeling to find a rabbit or a snapping turtle on some strange world.

It makes you wonder if this exploration business isn't all some big joke, and somebody has been everywhere before you even started ''.

The surveyor looked sidewise at the captain.

The big man seldom gave out with such thoughts.

Ekstrohm cleared his throat.

`` What shall we do with this one??

Dissect it ''??

Ryan nudged it with his toe, following Ekstrohm's example.

`` I don't know, Stormy.

It sure as hell doesn't look like any dominant intelligent species to me.

No hands, for one thing.

Of course, that's not definite proof ''.

`` No, it isn't '', Ekstrohm said.

`` I think we'd better let it lay until we get a clearer picture of the ecological setup around here.

In the meantime, we might be thinking on the problem all these dead beasts represent.

What killed them ''??

`` It looks like we did, when we made blastdown ''.

`` But what about our landing was lethal to the creatures ''??

`` Radiation ''??

Ekstrohm suggested.

`` The planet is very low in radiation from mineral deposits, and the atmosphere seems to shield out most of the solar output.

Any little dose of radiation might knock off these critters ''.

`` I don't know about that.

Maybe it would work the other way.

Maybe because they have had virtually no radioactive exposure and don't have any R's stored up, they could take a lot without harm ''.

`` Then maybe it was the shockwave we set up.

Or maybe it's sheer xenophobia.

They curl up and die at the sight of something strange and alien -- like a spaceship ''.

`` Maybe '', the captain admitted.

`` At this stage of the game anything could be possible.

But there's one possibility I particularly don't like ''.

`` And that is ''??

`` Suppose it was not us that killed these aliens.

Suppose it is something right on the planet, native to it.

I just hope it doesn't work on Earthmen too.

These critters went real sudden ''.

Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and thought, the camp is quiet.

The Earthmen made camp outside the spaceship.

There was no reason to leave the comfortable quarters inside the ship, except that, faced with a possibility of sleeping on solid ground, they simply had to get out.

The camp was a cluster of aluminum bubbles, ringed with a spy web to alert the Earthmen to the approach of any being.

Each man had a bubble to himself, privacy after the long period of enforced intimacy on board the ship.

Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and listened to the sounds of the night on Yancey-6 138.

There was a keening of wind, and a cracking of the frozen ground.

Insects there were on the world, but they were frozen solid during the night, only to revive and thaw in the morning sun.

The bunk he lay on was much more uncomfortable than the acceleration couches on board.

Yet he knew the others were sleeping more soundly, now that they had renewed their contact with the matter that had birthed them to send them riding high vacuum.

Ekstrohm was not asleep.

Now there could be an end to pretending.

He threw off the light blanket and swung his feet off the bunk, to the floor.

Ekstrohm stood up.

There was no longer any need to hide.

But what was there to do??

What had changed for him??

He no longer had to lie in his bunk all night, his eyes closed, pretending to sleep.

In privacy he could walk around, leave the light on, read.

It was small comfort for insomnia.

Ekstrohm never slept.

Some doctors had informed him he was mistaken about this.

Actually, they said, he did sleep, but so shortly and fitfully that he forgot.

Others admitted he was absolutely correct -- he never slept.

His body processes only slowed down enough for him to dispell fatigue poisons.

Occasionally he fell into a waking, gritty-eyed stupor;;

but he never slept.

Never at all.

Naturally, he couldn't let his shipmates know this.

Insomnia would ground him from the Exploration Service, on physiological if not psychological grounds.

He had to hide it.

Over the years, he had had buddies in space in whom he thought he could confide.

The buddies invariably took advantage of him.

Since he couldn't sleep anyway, he might as well stand their watches for them or write their reports.

Where the hell did he get off threatening to report any laxness on their part to the captain??

A man with insomnia had better avoid bad dreams of that kind if he knew what was good for him.

Ekstrohm had to hide his secret.

In a camp, instead of shipboard, hiding the secret was easier.

But the secret itself was just as hard.

Ekstrohm picked up a lightweight no-back from the ship's library, a book by Bloch, the famous twentieth century expert on sex.

He scanned a few lines on the social repercussions of a celebrated nineteenth century sex murderer, but he couldn't seem to concentrate on the weighty, pontifical, ponderous style.

On impulse, he flipped up the heat control on his coverall and slid back the hatch of the bubble.

Ekstrohm walked through the alien glass and looked up at the unfamiliar constellations, smelling the frozen sterility of the thin air.

Behind him, his mates stirred without waking.

Ekstrohm was startled in the morning by a banging on the hatch of his bubble.

It took him a few seconds to put his thoughts in order, and then he got up from the bunk where he had been resting, sleeplessly.

The angry burnt-red face of Ryan greeted him.

`` Okay, Stormy, this isn't the place for fun and games.

What did you do with them ''??

`` Do with what ''??

`` The dead beasties.

All the dead animals laying around the ship ''.

`` What are you talking about, Ryan??

What do you think I did with them ''??

`` I don't know.

All I know is that they are gone ''.

`` Gone ''??

Ekstrohm shouldered his way outside and scanned the veldt.

There was no ring of animal corpses.

Nothing.

Nothing but wispy grass whipping in the keen breeze.

`` I'll be damned '', Ekstrohm said.

`` You are right now, buddy.

ExPe doesn't like anybody mucking up primary evidence ''.

`` Where do you get off, Ryan ''??

Ekstrohm demanded.

`` Why pick me for your patsy??

This has got to be some kind of local phenomenon.

Why accuse a shipmate of being behind this ''??

`` Listen, Ekstrohm, I want to give you the benefit of every doubt.

But you aren't exactly the model of a surveyor, you know.

You've been riding on a pink ticket for six years, you know that ''.

`` No '', Ekstrohm said, `` No, I didn't know that ''.

`` You've been hiding things from me and Nogol every jump we've made with you.

Now comes this!!

It fits the pattern of secrecy and stealth you've been involved in ''.

`` What could I do with your lousy dead bodies??

What would I want with them ''??

`` All I know is that you were outside the bubbles last night, and you were the only sentient being who came in or out of our alarm web.

The tapes show that.

Now all the bodies are missing, like they got up and walked away ''.

It was not a new experience to Ekstrohm.

No.

Suspicion wasn't new to him at all.

`` Ryan, there are other explanations for the disappearance of the bodies.

Look for them, will you??

I give you my word I'm not trying to pull some stupid kind of joke, or to deliberately foul up the expedition.

Take my word, can't you ''??

Ryan shook his head.

`` I don't think I can.

There's still such a thing as mental illness.

You may not be responsible ''.

Ekstrohm scowled.

`` Don't try anything violent, Stormy.

I outweigh you fifty pounds and I'm fast for a big man ''.

`` I wasn't planning on jumping you.

Why do you have to jump me the first time something goes wrong??

She lived and was given a name.

Helva.

For her first three vegetable months she waved her crabbed claws, kicked weakly with her clubbed feet and enjoyed the usual routine of the infant.

She was not alone for there were three other such children in the big city's special nursery.

Soon they all were removed to Central Laboratory School where their delicate transformation began.

One of the babies died in the initial transferral but of Helva's `` class '', seventeen thrived in the metal shells.

Instead of kicking feet, Helva's neural responses started her wheels;;

instead of grabbing with hands, she manipulated mechanical extensions.

As she matured, more and more neural synapses would be adjusted to operate other mechanisms that went into the maintenance and running of a space ship.

For Helva was destined to be the `` brain '' half of a scout ship, partnered with a man or a woman, whichever she chose, as the mobile half.

She would be among the elite of her kind.

Her initial intelligence tests registered above normal and her adaptation index was unusually high.

As long as her development within her shell lived up to expectations, and there were no side-effects from the pituitary tinkering, Helva would live a rewarding, rich and unusual life, a far cry from what she would have faced as an ordinary, `` normal '' being.

However, no diagram of her brain patterns, no early I.Q. tests recorded certain essential facts about Helva that Central must eventually learn.

They would have to bide their official time and see, trusting that the massive doses of shell-psychology would suffice her, too, as the necessary bulwark against her unusual confinement and the pressures of her profession.

A ship run by a human brain could not run rogue or insane with the power and resources Central had to build into their scout ships.

Brain ships were, of course, long past the experimental stages.

Most babes survived the techniques of pituitary manipulation that kept their bodies small, eliminating the necessity of transfers from smaller to larger shells.

And very, very few were lost when the final connection was made to the control panels of ship or industrial combine.

Shell people resembled mature dwarfs in size whatever their natal deformities were, but the well-oriented brain would not have changed places with the most perfect body in the Universe.

So, for happy years, Helva scooted around in her shell with her classmates, playing such games as Stall, Power-Seek, studying her lessons in trajectory, propulsion techniques, computation, logistics, mental hygiene, basic alien psychology, philology, space history, law, traffic, codes: all the et ceteras that eventually became compounded into a reasoning, logical, informed citizen.

Not so obvious to her, but of more importance to her teachers, Helva ingested the precepts of her conditioning as easily as she absorbed her nutrient fluid.

She would one day be grateful to the patient drone of the sub-conscious-level instruction.

Helva's civilization was not without busy, do-good associations, exploring possible inhumanities to terrestrial as well as extraterrestrial citizens.

One such group got all incensed over shelled `` children '' when Helva was just turning fourteen.

When they were forced to, Central Worlds shrugged its shoulders, arranged a tour of the Laboratory Schools and set the tour off to a big start by showing the members case histories, complete with photographs.

Very few committees ever looked past the first few photos.

Most of their original objections about `` shells '' were overridden by the relief that these hideous( to them) bodies were mercifully concealed.

Helva's class was doing Fine Arts, a selective subject in her crowded program.

She had activated one of her microscopic tools which she would later use for minute repairs to various parts of her control panel.

Her subject was large -- a copy of the Last Supper -- and her canvas, small -- the head of a tiny screw.

She had tuned her sight to the proper degree.

As she worked she absentmindedly crooned, producing a curious sound.

Shell people used their own vocal cords and diaphragms but sound issued through microphones rather than mouths.

Helva's hum then had a curious vibrancy, a warm, dulcet quality even in its aimless chromatic wanderings.

`` Why, what a lovely voice you have '', said one of the female visitors.

Helva `` looked '' up and caught a fascinating panorama of regular, dirty craters on a flaky pink surface.

Her hum became a gurgle of surprise.

She instinctively regulated her `` sight '' until the skin lost its cratered look and the pores assumed normal proportions.

`` Yes, we have quite a few years of voice training, madam '', remarked Helva calmly.

`` Vocal peculiarities often become excessively irritating during prolonged intra-stellar distances and must be eliminated.

I enjoyed my lessons ''.

Although this was the first time that Helva had seen unshelled people, she took this experience calmly.

Any other reaction would have been reported instantly.

`` I meant that you have a nice singing voice dear '', the lady amended.

`` Thank you.

Would you like to see my work ''??

Helva asked, politely.

She instinctively sheered away from personal discussions but she filed the comment away for further meditation.

`` Work ''??

Asked the lady.

`` I am currently reproducing the Last Supper on the head of a screw ''.

`` No, I say '', the lady twittered.

Helva turned her vision back to magnification and surveyed her copy critically.

`` Of course, some of my color values do not match the old Master's and the perspective is faulty but I believe it to be a fair copy ''.

The lady's eyes, unmagnified, bugged out.

`` Oh, I forget '', and Helva's voice was really contrite.

If she could have blushed, she would have.

`` You people don't have adjustable vision ''.

The monitor of this discourse grinned with pride and amusement as Helva's tone indicated pity for the unfortunate.

`` Here, this will help '', suggested Helva, substituting a magnifying device in one extension and holding it over the picture.

In a kind of shock, the ladies and gentlemen of the committee bent to observe the incredibly copied and brilliantly executed Last Supper on the head of a screw.

`` Well '', remarked one gentleman who had been forced to accompany his wife, `` the good Lord can eat where angels fear to tread ''.

`` Are you referring, sir '', asked Helva politely, `` to the Dark Age discussions of the number of angels who could stand on the head of a pin ''??

`` I had that in mind ''.

`` If you substitute' atom' for' angel', the problem is not insoluble, given the metallic content of the pin in question ''.

`` Which you are programed to compute ''??

`` Of course ''.

`` Did they remember to program a sense of humor, as well, young lady ''??

`` We are directed to develop a sense of proportion, sir, which contributes the same effect ''.

The good man chortled appreciatively and decided the trip was worth his time.

If the investigation committee spent months digesting the thoughtful food served them at the Laboratory School, they left Helva with a morsel as well.

`` Singing '' as applicable to herself required research.

She had, of course, been exposed to and enjoyed a music appreciation course which had included the better known classical works such as `` Tristan und Isolde '', `` Candide '', `` Oklahoma '', `` Nozze de Figaro '', the atomic age singers, Eileen Farrell, Elvis Presley and Geraldine Todd, as well as the curious rhythmic progressions of the Venusians, Capellan visual chromatics and the sonic concerti of the Altairians.

But `` singing '' for any shell person posed considerable technical difficulties to be overcome.

Shell people were schooled to examine every aspect of a problem or situation before making a prognosis.

Balanced properly between optimism and practicality, the nondefeatist attitude of the shell people led them to extricate themselves, their ships and personnel, from bizarre situations.

Therefore to Helva, the problem that she couldn't open her mouth to sing, among other restrictions, did not bother her.

She would work out a method, by-passing her limitations, whereby she could sing.

She approached the problem by investigating the methods of sound reproduction through the centuries, human and instrumental.

Her own sound production equipment was essentially more instrumental than vocal.

Breath control and the proper enunciation of vowel sounds within the oral cavity appeared to require the most development and practice.

Shell people did not, strictly speaking, breathe.

For their purposes, oxygen and other gases were not drawn from the surrounding atmosphere through the medium of lungs but sustained artificially by solution in their shells.

After experimentation, Helva discovered that she could manipulate her diaphragmic unit to sustain tone.

By relaxing the throat muscles and expanding the oral cavity well into the frontal sinuses, she could direct the vowel sounds into the most felicitous position for proper reproduction through her throat microphone.

She compared the results with tape recordings of modern singers and was not unpleased although her own tapes had a peculiar quality about them, not at all unharmonious, merely unique.

Acquiring a repertoire from the Laboratory library was no problem to one trained to perfect recall.

She found herself able to sing any role and any song which struck her fancy.

It would not have occurred to her that it was curious for a female to sing bass, baritone, tenor, alto, mezzo, soprano and coloratura as she pleased.

It was, to Helva, only a matter of the correct reproduction and diaphragmic control required by the music attempted.

If the authorities remarked on her curious avocation, they did so among themselves.

Shell people were encouraged to develop a hobby so long as they maintained proficiency in their technical work.

On the anniversary of her sixteenth year in her shell, Helva was unconditionally graduated and installed in her ship, the Aj.

Her permanent titanium shell was recessed behind an even more indestructible barrier in the central shaft of the scout ship.

The neural, audio, visual and sensory connections were made and sealed.

Her extendibles were diverted, connected or augmented and the final, delicate-beyond-description brain taps were completed while Helva remained anesthetically unaware of the proceedings.

When she awoke, she was the ship.

Her brain and intelligence controlled every function from navigation to such loading as a scout ship of her class needed.

She could take care of herself and her ambulatory half, in any situation already recorded in the annals of Central Worlds and any situation its most fertile minds could imagine.

Her first actual flight, for she and her kind had made mock flights on dummy panels since she was eight, showed her complete mastery of the techniques of her profession.

She was ready for her great adventures and the arrival of her mobile partner.

There were nine qualified scouts sitting around collecting base pay the day Helva was commissioned.

There were several missions which demanded instant attention but Helva had been of interest to several department heads in Central for some time and each man was determined to have her assigned to his section.

Consequently no one had remembered to introduce Helva to the prospective partners.

The ship always chose its own partner.

Had there been another `` brain '' ship at the Base at the moment, Helva would have been guided to make the first move.

As it was, while Central wrangled among itself, Robert Tanner sneaked out of the pilots' barracks, out to the field and over to Helva's slim metal hull.

`` Hello, anyone at home ''??

Tanner wisecracked.

`` Of course '', replied Helva logically, activating her outside scanners.

`` Are you my partner ''??

She asked hopefully, as she recognized the Scout Service uniform.

`` All you have to do is ask '', he retorted hopefully.

`` No one has come.

I thought perhaps there were no partners available and I've had no directives from Central ''.

Even to herself Helva sounded a little self-pitying but the truth was she was lonely, sitting on the darkened field.

Always she had had the company of other shells and more recently, technicians by the score.

The sudden solitude had lost its momentary charm and become oppressive.

`` No directives from Central is scarcely a cause for regret, but there happen to be eight other guys biting their fingernails to the quick just waiting for an invitation to board you, you beautiful thing ''.

It would have killed you in the cabin.

Do you have anything for me ''??

Mercer stammered, not knowing what B'dikkat meant, and the two-nosed man answered for him, `` I think he has a nice baby head, but it isn't big enough for you to take yet ''.

Mercer never noticed the needle touch his arm.

B'dikkat had turned to the next knot of people when the super-condamine hit Mercer.

He tried to run after B'dikkat, to hug the lead spacesuit, to tell B'dikkat that he loved him.

He stumbled and fell, but it did not hurt.

The many-bodied girl lay near him.

Mercer spoke to her.

`` Isn't it wonderful??

You're beautiful, beautiful, beautiful.

I'm so happy to be here ''.

The woman covered with growing hands came and sat beside them.

She radiated warmth and good fellowship.

Mercer thought that she looked very distinguished and charming.

He struggled out of his clothes.

It was foolish and snobbish to wear clothing when none of these nice people did.

The two women babbled and crooned at him.

With one corner of his mind he knew that they were saying nothing, just expressing the euphoria of a drug so powerful that the known universe had forbidden it.

With most of his mind he was happy.

He wondered how anyone could have the good luck to visit a planet as nice as this.

He tried to tell the Lady Da, but the words weren't quite straight.

A painful stab hit him in the abdomen.

The drug went after the pain and swallowed it.

It was like the cap in the hospital, only a thousand times better.

The pain was gone, though it had been crippling the first time.

He forced himself to be deliberate.

He rammed his mind into focus and said to the two ladies who lay pinkly nude beside him in the desert, `` That was a good bite.

Maybe I will grow another head.

That would make B'dikkat happy ''!!

The Lady Da forced the foremost of her bodies in an upright position.

Said she, `` I'm strong, too.

I can talk.

Remember, man, remember.

People never live forever.

We can die, too, we can die like real people.

I do so believe in death ''!!

Mercer smiled at her through his happiness.

`` Of course you can.

But isn't this nice ''

With this he felt his lips thicken and his mind go slack.

He was wide awake, but he did not feel like doing anything.

In that beautiful place, among all those companionable and attractive people, he sat and smiled.

B'dikkat was sterilizing his knives.

Mercer wondered how long the super-condamine had lasted him.

He endured the ministrations of the dromozoa without screams or movement.

The agonies of nerves and itching of skin were phenomena which happened somewhere near him, but meant nothing.

He watched his own body with remote, casual interest.

The Lady Da and the hand-covered woman stayed near him.

After a long time the half-man dragged himself over to the group with his powerful arms.

Having arrived he blinked sleepily and friendlily at them, and lapsed back into the restful stupor from which he had emerged.

Mercer saw the sun rise on occasion, closed his eyes briefly, and opened them to see stars shining.

Time had no meaning.

The dromozoa fed him in their mysterious way;;

the drug canceled out his needs for cycles of the body.

At last he noticed a return of the inwardness of pain.

The pains themselves had not changed;;

he had.

He knew all the events which could take place on Shayol.

He remembered them well from his happy period.

Formerly he had noticed them -- now he felt them.

He tried to ask the Lady Da how long they had had the drug, and how much longer they would have to wait before they had it again.

She smiled at him with benign, remote happiness;;

apparently her many torsos, stretched out along the ground, had a greater capacity for retaining the drug than did his body.

She meant him well, but was in no condition for articulate speech.

The half-man lay on the ground, arteries pulsating prettily behind the half-transparent film which protected his abdominal cavity.

Mercer squeezed the man's shoulder.

The half-man woke, recognized Mercer and gave him a healthily sleepy grin.

``' A good morrow to you, my boy.

That's out of a play.

Did you ever see a play ''??

`` You mean a game with cards ''??

`` No '', said the half-man, `` a sort of eye-machine with real people doing the figures ''.

`` I never saw that '', said Mercer, `` but I '' --

`` But you want to ask me when B'dikkat is going to come back with the needle ''.

`` Yes '', said Mercer, a little ashamed of his obviousness.

`` Soon '', said the half-man.

That's why I think of plays.

We all know what is going to happen.

We all know when it is going to happen.

We all know what the dummies will do '' -- he gestured at the hummocks in which the decorticated men were cradled -- `` and we all know what the new people will ask.

But we never know how long a scene is going to take ''.

`` What's a' scene' ''??

Asked Mercer.

`` Is that the name for the needle ''??

The half-man laughed with something close to real humor.

`` No, no, no.

You've got the lovelies on the brain.

A scene is just a part of a play.

I mean we know the order in which things happen, but we have no clocks and nobody cares enough to count days or to make calendars and there's not much climate here, so none of us know how long anything takes.

The pain seems short and the pleasure seems long.

I'm inclined to think that they are about two Earth-weeks each ''.

Mercer did not know what an `` Earth-week '' was, since he had not been a well-read man before his conviction, but he got nothing more from the half-man at that time.

The half-man received a dromozootic implant, turned red in the face, shouted senselessly at Mercer, `` Take it out, you fool!!

Take it out of me ''!!

When Mercer looked on helplessly, the half-man twisted over on his side, his pink dusty back turned to Mercer, and wept hoarsely and quietly to himself.

Mercer himself could not tell how long it was before B'dikkat came back.

It might have been several days.

It might have been several months.

Once again B'dikkat moved among them like a father;;

once again they clustered like children.

This time B'dikkat smiled pleasantly at the little head which had grown out of Mercer's thigh -- a sleeping child's head, covered with light hair on top and with dainty eyebrows over the resting eyes.

Mercer got the blissful needle.

When B'dikkat cut the head from Mercer's thigh, he felt the knife grinding against the cartilage which held the head to his own body.

He saw the child-face grimace as the head was cut;;

he felt the far, cool flash of unimportant pain, as B'dikkat dabbed the wound with a corrosive antiseptic which stopped all bleeding immediately.

The next time it was two legs growing from his chest.

Then there had been another head beside his own.

Or was that after the torso and legs, waist to toe-tips, of the little girl which had grown from his side??

He forgot the order.

He did not count time.

Lady Da smiled at him often, but there was no love in this place.

She had lost the extra torsos.

In between teratologies, she was a pretty and shapely woman;;

but the nicest thing about their relationship was her whisper to him, repeated some thousands of time, repeated with smiles and hope, `` People never live forever ''.

She found this immensely comforting, even though Mercer did not make much sense out of it.

Thus events occurred, and victims changed in appearance, and new ones arrived.

Sometimes B'dikkat took the new ones, resting in the everlasting sleep of their burned-out brains, in a ground-truck to be added to other herds.

The bodies in the truck threshed and bawled without human speech when the dromozoa struck them.

Finally, Mercer did manage to follow B'dikkat to the door of the cabin.

He had to fight the bliss of super-condamine to do it.

Only the memory of previous hurt, bewilderment and perplexity made him sure that if he did not ask B'dikkat when he, Mercer, was happy, the answer would no longer be available when he needed it.

Fighting pleasure itself, he begged B'dikkat to check the records and to tell him how long he had been there.

B'dikkat grudgingly agreed, but he did not come out of the doorway.

He spoke through the public address box built into the cabin, and his gigantic voice roared out over the empty plain, so that the pink herd of talking people stirred gently in their happiness and wondered what their friend B'dikkat might be wanting to tell them.

When he said it, they thought it exceedingly profound, though none of them understood it, since it was simply the amount of time that Mercer had been on Shayol:

`` Standard years -- eighty-four years, seven months, three days, two hours, eleven and one half minutes.

Good luck, fellow ''.

Mercer turned away.

The secret little corner of his mind, which stayed sane through happiness and pain, made him wonder about B'dikkat.

What persuaded the cow-man to remain on Shayol??

What kept him happy without super-condamine??

Was B'dikkat a crazy slave to his own duty or was he a man who had hopes of going back to his own planet some day, surrounded by a family of little cow-people resembling himself??

Mercer, despite his happiness, wept a little at the strange fate of B'dikkat.

His own fate he accepted.

He remembered the last time he had eaten -- actual eggs from an actual pan.

The dromozoa kept him alive, but he did not know how they did it.

He staggered back to the group.

The Lady Da, naked in the dusty plain, waved a hospitable hand and showed that there was a place for him to sit beside her.

There were unclaimed square miles of seating space around them, but he appreciated the kindliness of her gesture none the less.

4,

The years, if they were years, went by.

The land of Shayol did not change.

Sometimes the bubbling sound of geysers came faintly across the plain to the herd of men;;

those who could talk declared it to be the breathing of Captain Alvarez.

There was night and day, but no setting of crops, no change of season, no generations of men.

Time stood still for these people, and their load of pleasure was so commingled with the shocks and pains of the dromozoa that the words of the Lady Da took on very remote meaning.

`` People never live forever ''.

Her statement was a hope, not a truth in which they could believe.

They did not have the wit to follow the stars in their courses, to exchange names with each other, to harvest the experience of each for the wisdom of all.

There was no dream of escape for these people.

Though they saw the old-style chemical rockets lift up from the field beyond B'dikkat's cabin, they did not make plans to hide among the frozen crop of transmuted flesh.

Far long ago, some other prisoner than one of these had tried to write a letter.

His handwriting was on a rock.

Mercer read it, and so had a few of the others, but they could not tell which man had done it.

Nor did they care.

The letter, scraped on stone, had been a message home.

They could still read the opening: `` Once, I was like you, stepping out of my window at the end of day, and letting the winds blow me gently toward the place I lived in.

Once, like you, I had one head, two hands, ten fingers on my hands.

The front part of my head was called a face, and I could talk with it.

Now I can only write, and that only when I get out of pain.

Thirty-three

Scotty did not go back to school.

His parents talked seriously and lengthily to their own doctor and to a specialist at the University Hospital -- Mr. McKinley was entitled to a discount for members of his family -- and it was decided it would be best for him to take the remainder of the term off, spend a lot of time in bed and, for the rest, do pretty much as he chose -- provided, of course, he chose to do nothing too exciting or too debilitating.

His teacher and his school principal were conferred with and everyone agreed that, if he kept up with a certain amount of work at home, there was little danger of his losing a term.

Scotty accepted the decision with indifference and did not enter the arguments.

He was discharged from the hospital after a two-day checkup and he and his parents had what Mr. McKinley described as a `` celebration lunch '' at the cafeteria on the campus.

Rachel wore a smart hat and, because she had been warned recently about smoking, puffed at her cigarettes through a long ivory holder stained with lipstick.

Scotty's father sat sprawled in his chair, angular, alert as a cricket, looking about at the huge stainless-steel appointments of the room with an expression of proprietorship.

Teachers -- men who wore brown suits and had gray hair and pleasant smiles -- came to their table to talk shop and to be introduced to Scotty and Rachel.

Rachel was polite, Scotty indifferent.

They ate the cafeteria food with its orange sauces and Scotty gazed without interest at his food, the teachers, the heroic baronial windows, and the bright ranks of college banners.

His father tried to make the food a topic.

`` The blueberry pie is good, Scotty.

I recommend it ''.

He looked at his son, his face worried.

Scotty murmured, `` No, thanks '', so softly his father had to bend his gaunt height across the table and turn a round brown ear to him.

Scotty regarded the ear and the grizzled hair around it with a moment of interest.

He said more loudly, `` I'm full, old Pop ''.

He had eaten almost nothing on the crested, three-sectioned plate and had drunk about half the milk in its paper container.

`` He's all right, Craig '', Rachel said.

`` I can fix him something later in the afternoon when we get home ''.

Since his seizure, Scotty had had little appetite;;

yet his changed appearance, surprisingly, was one of plumpness.

His face was fuller;;

his lips and the usually sharp lines of his jaw had become swollen-looking.

He breathed now with his mouth open, showing a whitely curving section of lower teeth;;

he kept his eyes, with their puffed blurred lids, always lowered, though not, apparently, focusing.

Even his neck seemed thicker and, therefore, shorter.

His hands, which had been as quick as a pair of fluttering birds, were now neither active nor really relaxed.

They lay on his lap, palms up, stiffly motionless, the tapered fingers a little thick at the joints.

Altogether he had, since the seizure, the appearance of a boy who overindulged in food and took no exercise.

He looked lazy, spoiled, a little querulous.

Rachel had little to say.

She greeted her husband's colleagues with smiling politeness, offering nothing.

Mr. McKinley, for all his sprawling and his easy familiarity, was completely alert to his son, eyes always on the still face, jumping to anticipate Scotty's desires.

It was a strained, silent lunch.

Rachel said, `` I'd better get him to bed ''.

The doctors had suggested Scotty remain most of every afternoon in bed until he was stronger.

Since Mr. McKinley had to give a lecture, Rachel and Scotty drove home alone in the Plymouth.

They did not speak much.

Scotty gazed out at ugly gray slums and said softly, `` Look at those stupid kids ''.

It was a Negro section of peeling row houses, store-front churches and ragged children.

Rachel had to bend toward Scotty and ask him to repeat.

He said, `` Nothing ''.

And then: `` There are lots of kids around here ''.

Scotty looked at the children, his mouth slightly opened, his eyes dull.

He felt tired and full and calm.

Thirty-four

the days seemed short, perhaps because his routine was, each day, almost the same.

He rose late and went down in his bathrobe and slippers to have breakfast either alone or with Rachel.

Virginia treated him with attention and tried to tempt his appetite with special food: biscuits, cookies, candies -- the result of devoted hours in the tiled kitchen.

She would hover over him and, looking like her brother, anxiously watch the progress of Scotty's fork or spoon.

`` You don't eat enough, honey.

Try to get that down ''.

Rachel, observing, would say, `` He has to rediscover his own capacity.

It'll take time ''.

Virginia and Rachel talked to each other quietly now, as allies who are political rather than natural might in a war atmosphere.

Both watched Scotty constantly, Rachel without seeming to, Virginia openly, her eyes filled with concern.

Scotty was neutral.

He did not resent their supervision or Virginia's sometimes tiring sympathy.

He ate what he felt like, slept as much or as little as he pleased, and moved about the draughty rooms of the house, when he was not in bed, with slow, dubious steps, like an elderly tourist in a cathedral.

His energy was gone.

He was able, now, to sit for hours in a chair in the living room and stare out at the bleak yard without moving.

His hands lay loosely, yet stiffly -- they were like wax hands: almost lifelike, not quite -- folded in his lap;;

his mouth hung slightly open.

When he was asked a question or addressed in such a way that some response was inescapable, he would answer;;

if, as often happened, he had to repeat because he had spoken too softly, he would repeat his words in the same way, without emphasis or impatience, only a little louder.

He had not mentioned Kate.

He had not even thought about her much except once or twice at night in bed when his slowly ranging thoughts would abruptly, almost accidentally, encounter her.

At these times he felt a kind of pain in his upper chest, but it was an objective pain, in no way different from others in intensity and not different in kind;;

it was like the bandaged wound on the back of his head which occasionally throbbed;;

it was merely another part of his weakness.

He was calm, drugged, and lazy.

He did not care.

Rachel mentioned Kate.

She said, `` I notice the girl from across the street hasn't bothered to phone or visit ''.

Scotty said, `` That's all right.

Kate's all right ''.

He thought about it briefly, then deliberately turned the talk to something else.

Once, sitting at the front window in his parents' room, he saw Kate come out of her house.

She was with Elizabeth.

They were far off and looked tiny.

The heavy branches in his front yard would hide and then reveal them.

They turned at the bottom of Kate's steps and moved off in the direction of the park.

He thought he saw -- it awakened and, for a moment, interested him -- that Elizabeth held a leash in her hand and that a round fuzzy puppy was on the end of the leash.

Then they disappeared and Scotty got up and went into his own room and got into bed.

By the time he was under the covers he had forgotten about seeing Kate.

The doctor, since Scotty was no longer allowed to make his regular trips into town to see him, came often and informally to the house.

He would sit, slim-waisted and spare, on the edge of Scotty's bed, his legs crossed so elaborately that the crossed foot could tap the floor.

Scotty did not mind the doctor's unsmiling teasing as he used to.

`` Husky young man '', he said with mock distaste.

`` I imagine you're always battling in school ''.

`` I don't go to school any more ''.

`` Pardon ''??

The doctor had to bend close to hear;;

his delicate hand, as veined as a moth's wing, rested absently on Scotty's chest.

Scotty said the same words more loudly.

`` Oh.

Well, we're taking a little vacation, that's all ''.

He turned unsmilingly to Rachel.

`` I think by the end of next week he could get out in the air a little.

He could now but the weakness is very definite;;

it would exhaust him further and unnecessarily.

He'll be stronger soon ''.

His stethoscope was on the table by Scotty's bed and he picked it up and wagged it at Scotty.

He said fussily, `` Just keep the cap on those strong emotions ''.

The stethoscope glinted silver in the darkening room.

`` I'll drop by again in a few days ''.

Rachel stayed on after the doctor had gone.

She smoothed the covers on Scotty's bed and picked things up from the floor.

She did not touch him.

Scotty watched with disinterest.

He did not speak.

He had no desire to.

She said, `` Do you think you'll miss school ''??

He had noticed how formal and irritably exact Rachel had grown.

He did not care.

He felt her irritability did not concern him, yet he knew he would not care even if it did.

He shook his head.

`` We've had any number of calls about you.

You could win a popularity contest at that school without any trouble.

Miss Estherson called twice.

She wants to pay you a visit.

She says the children miss you.

Apparently you were the light of their lives ''.

Scotty shrugged slightly.

Rachel came close to the bed, bent as if she would kiss him, then moved away.

She was frowning.

`` That doctor annoys me ''.

She seemed to speak to herself.

`` Do you suppose his self-consciousness is characteristic of the new Negro professionals or merely of doctors in general ''??

She turned to him again.

`` Well, Mrs. Charles -- Sally -- has phoned too.

She was very worried ''.

Rachel's tone was dry.

`` She didn't really say '' -- She glanced away at the floor, then swooped gracefully and picked up one of Scotty's slippers.

`` I mean, do you feel like seeing Kate ''??

Scotty said, `` I don't know ''.

It was true.

He did not.

There was the slight pain, but it was no different from the throbbing in his head.

`` Well, there's time, in any case.

We'll wait till you're stronger and then talk about it ''.

She put the slipper neatly by its mate at the foot of the bed.

Scotty said, `` Okay ''.

This time Rachel kissed him lightly on the forehead.

Scotty was pleased.

His father was a constant visitor.

Scotty would hear the front door in the evening and then his father's deep slow voice;;

it floated up the stairs.

`` How's Scotty ''??

And Rachel's or Virginia's reply: `` better.

He's getting plenty of rest ''.

`` Is his appetite improved ''??

Or: `` Does he get exercise ''??

The exchange was almost invariable, and Scotty, in his bed, could hear every word of it.

He never smiled.

It required an energy he no longer possessed to be satirical about his father.

His father would come upstairs and stand self-consciously at the foot of the bed and look at his son.

After a pause, during which he studied Scotty's face as if Scotty were not there and could not study him too, Mr. McKinley would ask the same questions he had asked downstairs.

Scotty would reply softly and his father, apologetically, would ask him to repeat.

`` I'm eating more '', he would say.

Or: `` I walk around the house a lot ''.

`` Perhaps you should get out a little ''.

`` I'm not supposed to yet ''.

He was not irritated.

He did not mind the useless, kindly questions.

He looked at the lined face with vague interest;;

he felt he was noting it, as if it were something he might think about when he grew stronger.

Mr. McKinley examined everything with critical care, seeking something material to blame for his son's illness.

`` Have you got enough blankets ''??

And another time, without accusation: `` You never wore that scarf I bought you ''.

Where their sharp edges seemed restless as sea waves thrusting themselves upward in angry motion, Papa-san sat glacier-like, his smooth solidity, his very immobility defying all the turmoil about him.

`` Our objective '', the colonel had said that day of the briefing, `` is Papa-san ''.

There the objective sat, brooding over all.

Gouge, burn, blast, insult it as they would, could anyone really take Papa-san??

Between the ponderous hulk and himself, in the valley over which Papa-san reigned, men had hidden high explosives, booby traps, and mines.

The raped valley was a pregnant womb awaiting abortion.

On the forward slope in front of his own post stretched two rows of barbed wire.

At the slope's base coils of concertina stretched out of eye range like a wild tangle of children's hoops, stopped simultaneously, weirdly poised as if awaiting the magic of the child's touch to start them all rolling again.

Closer still, regular barricades of barbed wire hung on timber supports.

Was it all vain labor??

Who would clean up the mess when the war was over??

Smiling at his quixotic thoughts, Warren turned back from the opening and lit a cigarette before sitting down.

Tonight a group of men, tomorrow night he himself, would go out there somewhere and wait.

If he were to go with White, he would be out there two days, not just listening in the dark at some point between here and Papa-san, but moving ever deeper into enemy land -- behind Papa-san -- itself.

Was this what he had expected??

He hadn't realized that there would be so much time to think, so many lulls.

Somehow he had forgotten what he must have been told, that combat was an intermittent activity.

Now he knew that the moment illuminated by the vision on the train would have to be approached.

It could take place tomorrow night, or it might occur months from now.

There was just too much time.

Time to become afraid.

White's suggestion flattered, but he did not like the identity.

He did not spill over with hatred for the enemy.

He hadn't even seen him yet

Pressing his cigarette out in the earth, Warren walked to the slit and scanned the jagged hills.

He saw no life, but still stood there for a time peering at the unlovely hills, his gaze continually returning to Papa-san.

He had come here in order to test himself.

While most of his beliefs were still unsettled, he knew that he did not believe in killing.

Yet, he was here.

He had come because he could not live out his life feeling that he had been a coward.

There were ten men on the patrol which Sergeant Prevot led out that next night.

The beaming ROK was carrying a thirty-caliber machine gun;;

another man lugged the tripod and a box of ammunition.

Warren and White each carried, in addition to their own weapons and ammo, a box of ammo for the ROK's machine gun.

Others carried extra clips for the Browning Automatic Rifle, which was in the hands of a little Mexican named Martinez.

Prevot had briefed the two new men that afternoon.

`` We just sit quiet and wait '', Prevot had said.

`` Be sure the man nearest you is awake.

If Joe doesn't show up, we'll all be back here at 0600 hours.

Otherwise, we hold a reception.

Then we pull out under our mortar and artillery cover, but nobody pulls out until I say so.

Remember what I said about going out to get anybody left behind??

That still holds.

We bring back all dead and wounded ''.

At 2130 hours they had passed through the barbed wire at the point of departure.

Then began the journey through their own mine fields.

Mines.

Ours were kinder than theirs, some said.

They set bouncing betties to jump and explode at testicle level while we more mercifully had them go off at the head.

Mines.

Big ones and little.

The crude wooden boxes of the enemy, our nicely turned gray metal disks.

But theirs defied the detectors.

Mines.

A foot misplaced, a leg missing.

Mines.

All sizes: big ones, some wired to set off a whole field, little ones, hand grenade size.

Booby traps to fill the head with chunks of metal.

Warren tried to shake off the jumble of his fears by looking at the sky.

It was dark.

Prevot had said that the searchlights would be bounced off the clouds at 2230 hours, `` which gives us time to get settled in position ''.

Because they were new men and to be sure that they didn't get lost, Prevot had placed Warren and White in the center of the patrol as it filed out.

His eyes now fixed on White's solid figure, Warren could hear behind him the tread of another.

He could also hear the stream which he had seen from his position.

They were going to follow it for part of their journey.

`` It's safe '', Prevot had said, `` and it provides cover for our noise ''.

Soon they were picking their way along the edge of the stream which glowed in the night.

On their right rose the embankment covered with brush and trees.

If a branch extended out too far, each man held it back for the next, and if they met a low overhang, each warned the other.

Thus, stealthily they advanced upstream;;

then they turned to the right, climbed the embankment, and walked into the valley again.

There was no cover here, only grass sighing against pant-legs.

And with each sigh, like a whip in the hand of an expert, the grass stripped something from Warren.

The gentle whir of each footstep left him more naked than before, until he felt his unprotected flesh tremble, chilled by each new sound.

The shapes of the men ahead of him lacked solidity, as if the whip had stripped them of their very flesh.

The dark forms moved like mourners on some nocturnal pilgrimage, their dirge unsung for want of vocal chords.

The warped, broken trees in the valley assumed wraith-like shapes.

Clumps of brush that they passed were so many enchained demons straining in anger to tear and gnaw on his bones.

Looming over all, Papa-san leered down at him, threatening a hundred hidden malevolencies.

Off in the distance a searchlight flashed on, its beam slashing the sky.

The sharp ray was absorbed by a cloud, then reflected to the earth in a softer, diffused radiance.

Somewhere over there another patrol had need of light.

Warren thought of all the men out that night who, like himself, had left their protective ridge and -- fear working at their guts -- picked their way into the area beyond.

From the east to the west coast of the Korean peninsula was a strip of land in which fear-filled men were at that same moment furtively crawling through the night, sitting in sweaty anticipation of any movement or sound, or shouting amidst confused rifle flashes and muzzle blasts.

White's arm went up and Warren raised his own.

The patrol was stopping.

Prevot came up ``.

Take that spot over there '', he whispered, pointing to a small clump of blackness.

`` Give me your machine gun ammo ''.

Warren handed him the metal box and Prevot quietly disappeared down the line.

Lying in the grass behind the brush clump, Warren looked about.

The others likewise had hidden themselves in the grass and the brush.

Over his shoulder he could see Prevot with the machine gun crew.

Even at this short distance they were only vague shapes, setting up the machine gun on a small knoll so that it could fire above the heads of the rest of the patrol.

Warren eased his rifle's safety off and gently, slowly sneaked another clip of ammunition from one of the cloth bandoleers that marked the upper part of his body with an Aj.

This he placed within quick reach.

The walk and his fears had served to overheat him and his sweaty armpits cooled at the touch of the night air.

Although the armored vest fitted the upper part of his body snugly, he felt no security.

Figures seemed to crouch in the surrounding dark;;

in the distance he saw a band of men who seemed to advance and retreat even as he watched.

Certain this menace was only imaginary, he yet stared in fascinated horror, his hand sticky against the stock of his weapon.

He was aware of insistent inner beatings, as if prisoners within sought release from his rigid body.

Above, the glowing ivory baton of their searchlight pointed at the clouds, diluting the valley's dark to a pallid light.

Then the figures which held his attention became a group of shattered trees, standing like the grotesques of a medieval damnation scene.

Even so, he could not ease the tension of his body;;

the rough surface of the earth itself seemed to resist every attempt on his part to relax.

Sensing the unseen presence of the other men in the patrol, he felt mutely united to these nine near-strangers sharing this pinpoint of being with him.

He sensed something precious in the perilous moment, something akin to the knowledge gained on his bicycle trip through the French countryside, a knowledge imprisoned in speechlessness.

-- In France he had puzzled the meaning of the great stone monuments men had thrown up to the sky, and always as he wandered, he felt a stranger to their exultation.

They were poems in a strange language, of which he could barely touch a meaning -- enough to make his being ache with the desire for the fullness he sensed there.

Brittany, that stone-gray mystery through which he traveled for thirty days, sleeping in the barns of farmers or alongside roads, had worked some subtle change in him, he knew, and it was in Brittany that he had met Pierre.

Pierre had no hands;;

they had been severed at the wrists.

With leather cups fitted in his handlebars, he steered his bicycle.

He and Warren had traveled together for four days.

They visited the shipyards at Brest and Pierre had to sign the register, vouching for the integrity of the visiting foreigner.

He took the pen in his stumps and began to write.

`` Wait!!

Wait ''!!

Cried the guard who ran from the hut to shout to other men standing about outside.

They crowded the small room and peered over one another's shoulders to watch the handless man write his name in the book.

`` C'est formidable '', they exclaimed.

`` Mais, oui.

C'est merveilleux ''.

And then the questions came, eager, interested questions, and many compliments on his having overcome his infirmity.

`` Doesn't it ever bother you '', Warren had asked, `` to have people always asking you about your hands ''??

`` Oh, the French are a very curious people '', Pierre had laughed.

`` They are also honest seekers after truth.

Now the English are painfully silent about my missing hands.

They refuse to mention or to notice that they are not there.

The Americans, like yourself, take the fact for granted, try to be helpful, but don't ask questions.

I'm used to all three, but I think the French have the healthiest attitude ''.

That was the day that Pierre had told Warren about the Abbey of Solesmes.

`` You are looking tired and there you can rest.

It will be good for you.

I think, too '', he said, his dark eyes mischievous, `` that you will find there some clue to the secret of the cathedrals about which you have spoken ''.

Within two weeks Warren was ringing the bell at the abbey gate.

The monk who opened the door immediately calmed his worries about his reception: `` I speak English '', the old man said, `` but I do not hear it very well ''.

He smiled and stuck a large finger with white hairs sprouting on it into his ear as though that might help.

Smiling at Warren's protestations, the old monk took his grip from him and led him down a corridor to a small parlor.

`` Will you please wait in here.

Mickie sat over his second whisky-on-the-rocks in a little bar next to the funeral parlor on Pennsylvania Avenue.

Al's Little Cafe was small, dark, narrow, and filled with the mingled scent of beer, tobacco smoke, and Italian cooking.

Hanging over the bar was an oil painting of a nude Al had accepted from a student at the Corcoran Gallery who needed to eat and drink and was broke.

The nude was small and black-haired and elfin, and was called `` Eloise ''.

This was one place where Moonan could go for a drink in a back booth without anyone noticing him, or at least coming up and hanging around and wanting to know all the low-down.

The other patrons were taxi drivers and art students and small shopkeepers.

The reporters had not yet discovered that this was his hideaway.

His friend Jane was with him.

She was wise enough to realize a man could be good company even if he did weigh too much and didn't own the mint.

She was the widow of a writer who had died in an airplane crash, and Mickie had found her a job as head of the historical section of the Treasury.

This meant sorting out press clippings and the like.

Jane sat receptive and interested.

Mickie had a pleasant glow as he said, `` You see, both of them, I mean the President and Jeff Lawrence, are romantics.

A romantic is one who thinks the world is divinely inspired and all he has to do is find the right key, and then divine justice and altruism will appear.

It's like focusing a camera;;

the distant ship isn't there until you get the focus.

You know what I'm talking about.

I'm sure all girls feel this way about men until they live with them.

`` But when it comes to war, the Colonel knows what it is and Jeff doesn't.

Mr. Christiansen knows that a soldier will get the Distinguished Service Medal for conduct that would land him in prison for life or the electric chair as a civilian.

He had a mean, unbroken sheer bastard in his outfit, and someone invented the name Trig for him.

That's to say, he was trigger happy.

He'd shoot at anything if it was the rear end of a horse or his own sentry.

He was a wiry, inscrutable, silent country boy from the red clay of rural Alabama, and he spoke with the broad drawl that others normally make fun of.

But not in front of Trig.

I heard of some that tried it back in the States, and he'd knock them clear across the room.

There'd been a pretty bad incident back at the Marine base.

A New York kid, a refugee from one of the Harlem gangs, made fun of Trig's accent, and drew a knife.

Before the fight was over, the Harlem boy had a concussion and Trig was cut up badly.

They caught Trig stealing liquor from the officers' mess, and he got a couple of girls in trouble.

The fear of punishment just didn't bother him.

It wasn't there.

It was left out of him at birth.

This is why he made such a magnificent soldier.

He wasn't troubled with the ordinary, rank-and-file fear that overcomes and paralyzes and sends individual soldiers and whole companies under fire running in panic.

It just didn't occur to Trig that anything serious would happen to him.

Do you get the picture of the kind of fellow he was ''??

Jane nodded with a pleasant smile.

`` All right.

There was a sniper's nest in a mountain cave, and it was picking off our men with devilish accuracy.

The Colonel ordered that it be wiped out, and I suggested,' You ask for volunteers, and promise each man on the patrol a quart of whisky, ten dollars and a week-end pass to Davao.

Trig was one of the five volunteers.

The patrol snaked around in back of the cave, approached it from above and dropped in suddenly with wild howls.

You could hear them from our outpost.

There was a lot of shooting.

We knew the enemy was subdued, because a flare was fired as the signal.

So we hurried over.

Two of our men were killed, a third was wounded.

Trig and a very black colored boy from Detroit had killed or put out of action ten guerrillas by grenades and hand-to-hand fighting.

When we got there, Trig and the Negro were quarreling over possession of a gold crucifix around the neck of a wounded Filipino.

The colored boy had it, and Trig lunged at him with a knife and said,' Give that to me, you black bastard.

We don't 'low nigras to walk on the same sidewalk with white men where I come from.

`` The Negro got a bad slice on his chest from the knife wound ''.

`` What did the Colonel do about the men ''??

Jane asked in her placid, interested way.

Mickie laughed.

`` He recommended both of them for the DSM and the Detroit fellow for the Purple Heart, too, for a combat-inflicted wound.

So you see Mr. Christiansen knows what it's all about.

But not Jeff Lawrence.

When he was in the war, he was in Law or Supplies or something like that, and an old buddy of his told me he would come down on Sundays to the Pentagon and read the citations for medals -- just like the one we sent in for Trig -- and go away with a real glow.

These were heroes nine feet tall to him ''.

Jefferson Lawrence was alone at the small, perfectly appointed table by the window looking out over the river.

He had dinner and sat there over his coffee watching the winding pattern of traffic as it crossed the bridge and spread out like a serpent with two heads.

Beside him was Mrs. Dalloway.

He thought how this dainty, fragile older woman threading her way through the streets of Westminster on a day in June, enjoying the flowers in the shops, the greetings from old friends, but never really drawing a deep, passionate breath, was so like himself.

He, and Mrs. Dalloway, too, had never permitted themselves the luxury of joys that dug into the bone marrow of the spirit.

He had not because he was both poor and ambitious.

Poverty imposes a kind of chastity on the ambitious.

They cannot stop to grasp and embrace and sit in the back seat of cars along a dark country lane.

No, they must look the other way and climb one more painful step up the ladder.

He made the decision with his eyes open, or so he thought.

At any cost, he must leave the dreary Pennsylvania mining town where his father was a pharmacist.

And so he had, so he had.

At State College, he had no time to walk among the violets on the water's edge.

From his room he could look out in springtime and see the couples hand in hand walking slowly, deliciously, across the campus, and he could smell the sweet vernal winds.

He was not stone.

He was not unmoved.

He had to teach himself patiently that these traps were not for him.

He must mentally pull the blinds and close the window, so that all that existed was in the books before him.

At law school, the same.

More of this stamping down of human emotion as a young lawyer in New York.

By the time he was prosperous enough -- his goals were high -- he was bald and afraid of women.

The only one who would have him was his cripple, the strange unhappy woman who became his wife.

Perhaps it was right;;

perhaps it was just.

He had dared to defy nature, to turn his back to the Lorelei, and he was punished.

Like Mrs. Dalloway, with her regrets about Peter Walsh, he had his moments of melancholy over a youth too well spent.

If he had had a son, he would tell him, `` Gather ye rosebuds while ye may This same flower that smiles today tomorrow will be dying ''.

But then his son could afford it.

Lawrence was waiting for Bill Boxell.

The Vice President had called and asked if he could see the Secretary at his home.

He said the matter was urgent.

The Secretary was uneasy about the visit.

He did not like Boxell.

He suspected something underhanded and furtive about him.

Lawrence could not put his finger on it precisely, and this worried him.

When you disliked or distrusted a man, you should have a reason.

Human nature was not a piece of meat you could tell was bad by its smell.

Lawrence stared a minute at the lighted ribbon of traffic, hoping that a clue to his dislike of the Vice President would appear.

It did not.

Therefore, he decided he was unfair to the young man and should make an effort to understand and sympathize with his point of view.

A half hour later the Vice President arrived.

He looked very carefully at every piece of furnishing, as though hoping to store this information carefully in his mind.

He observed the Florentine vase in the hall, the Renoir painting in the library, as well as the long shelves of well-bound volumes;;

the pattern of the Oriental rug, the delicate cut-glass chandelier.

He said to the Secretary, `` I understand you came from a little Pennsylvania town near Wilkes-Barre.

How did you find out about this ''??

He waved his arm around at the furnishings.

It was not a discourteous question, Lawrence decided.

This young man had so little time to learn he had to be curious;;

he had to find out.

The Secretary did not tell him at what cost, at what loneliness, he learned these things.

He merely said, `` Any good decorator these days can make you a tasteful home ''.

The Vice President said, `` If you hear of any names that would fix me cheap in return for advertising they decorated the Vice President's home, let me know.

I can do business with that kind ''.

Again, Lawrence thought a little sadly, these were the fees of poverty and ambition.

Boxell did not have the chance to grow up graciously.

He had to acquire everything he was going to get in four years.

They had brandy in the library.

Boxell looked at Lawrence with a searching glance, the kind that a prosecuting attorney would give a man on trial.

What are your weaknesses??

Where will you break??

How best to destroy your peace??

The Vice President said with a slight bluster, `` There isn't anyone who loves the President more than I do.

Old Chris is my ideal.

At the same time, you have to face facts and realize that a man who's been in the Marine Corps all his life doesn't understand much about politics.

What does a monk know about sex ''??

Lawrence listened with the practiced, deceptive calm of the lawyer, but his face was in the shadow.

`` So, we have to protect the old man for his own good.

You see what I mean.

Congress is full of politicians, and if you want to get along with them, you have to be politic.

This is why I say we just can't go ahead and disarm the Germans and pull down our own defenses.

Let me tell you what happened to me today.

A fellow came up to me, a Senator, I don't have to tell you his name, and he told me,' I love the President like a brother, but God damn it, he's crucifying me.

I've got a quarter of a million Germans in my state, and those krautheads tune in on Father Werther every night, and if he tells them to go out and piss in the public square, that's what they do.

He's telling them now to write letters to their Congressmen opposing the disarmament of Germany.

And another one comes to me and he says,' Look here, there's a mill in my state employs five thousand people making uniforms for the Navy.

The Bishop looked at him coldly and said, `` Take it or leave it ''!!

Literally, there was nothing else to do.

He was caught in a machine.

But Sojourner was not easily excited or upset and said quite calmly: `` Let's go and see what it's like ''.

Annisberg was about seventy-five miles west of Birmingham, near the Georgia border and on the Tallahoosa River, a small and dirty stream.

The city was a center of manufacture, especially in textiles, and also because of the beauty of some of its surroundings, a residence for many owners of the great industries in north Alabama.

But it had, as was usual in southern cities of this sort, a Black Bottom, a low region near the river where the Negroes lived -- servants and laborers huddled together in a region with no sewage save the river, where streets and sidewalks were neglected and where there was much poverty and crime.

Wilson came by train from Birmingham and looked the city over;;

the rather pleasant white city was on the hill where the chief stores were.

Beyond were industries and factories.

Then they went down to Black Bottom.

In the midst of this crowded region was the Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church.

It was an old and dirty wooden structure, sadly in need of repair.

But it was a landmark.

It had been there 50 years or more and everybody in town, black and white, knew of it.

It had just suffered a calamity, the final crisis in a long series of calamities.

For the old preacher who had been there twenty-five years was dead, and the city mourned him.

He was a loud-voiced man, once vigorous but for many years now declining in strength and ability.

He was stern and overbearing with his flock, but obsequious and conciliatory with the whites, especially the rich who partly supported the church.

The Deacon Board, headed by a black man named Carlson, had practically taken over as the pastor grew old, and had its way with the support of the Amen corner.

The characteristic thing about this church was its Amen corner and the weekly religious orgy.

A knot of old worshippers, chiefly women, listened weekly to a sermon.

It began invariably in low tones, almost conversational, and then gradually worked up to high, shrill appeals to God and man.

And then the Amen corner took hold, re-enacting a form of group participation in worship that stemmed from years before the Greek chorus, spreading down through the African forest, overseas to the West Indies, and then here in Alabama.

With shout and slow dance, with tears and song, with scream and contortion, the corner group was beset by hysteria and shivering, wailing, shouting, possession of something that seemed like an alien and outside force.

It spread to most of the audience and was often viewed by visiting whites who snickered behind handkerchief and afterward discussed Negro religion.

It sometimes ended in death-like trances with many lying exhausted and panting on chair and floor.

To most of those who composed the Amen corner it was a magnificent and beautiful experience, something for which they lived from week to week.

It was often re-enacted in less wild form at the Wednesday night prayer meeting.

Wilson, on his first Sunday, witnessed this with something like disgust.

He had preached a short sermon, trying to talk man-to-man to the audience, to tell them who he was, what he had done in Macon and Birmingham, and what he proposed to do here.

He sympathized with them on the loss of their old pastor.

But then, at mention of that name, the Amen corner broke loose.

He had no chance to say another word.

At the very end, when the audience was silent and breathless, a collection was taken and then slowly everyone filed out.

The audience did not think much of the new pastor, and what the new pastor thought of the audience he did not dare at the time to say.

During the next weeks he looked over the situation.

First of all there was the parsonage, an utterly impossible place for civilized people to live in, originally poorly conceived, apparently not repaired for years, with no plumbing or sewage, with rat-holes and rot.

It was arranged that he would board in the home of one of the old members of the church, a woman named Catt who, as Wilson afterward found, was briefly referred to as The Cat because of her sharp tongue and fierce initiative.

Ann Catt was a lonely, devoted soul, never married, conducting a spotless home and devoted to her church, but a perpetual dissenter and born critic.

She soared over the new pastor like an avenging angel lest he stray from the path and not know all the truth and gossip of which she was chief repository.

Then Wilson looked over the church and studied its condition.

The salary of the pastor had for years been $500 annually and even this was in arrears.

Wilson made up his mind that he must receive at least $2,500, but when he mentioned this to the Deacons they said nothing.

The church itself must be repaired.

It was dirty and neglected.

It really ought to be rebuilt, and he determined to go up and talk to the city banks about this.

Meanwhile, the city itself should be talked to.

The streets in the colored section were dirty.

There was typhoid and malaria.

The children had nowhere to go and no place to play, not even sidewalks.

The school was small, dark and ill-equipped.

The teacher was a pliant fool.

There were two liquor saloons not very far from the church, one white, that is conducted for white people with a side entrance for Negroes;;

the other exclusively Negro.

Undoubtedly, there was a good deal of gambling in both.

On the other side of the church was a quiet, well-kept house with shutters and recently painted.

Wilson inquired about it.

It was called Kent House.

The deacon of the church, Carlson, was its janitor.

One of the leading members of the Amen corner was cook;;

there were two or three colored maids employed there.

Wilson was told that it was a sort of hotel for white people, which seemed to him rather queer.

Why should a white hotel be set down in the center of Black Bottom??

But nevertheless it looked respectable.

He was glad to have it there.

The rest of Black Bottom was a rabbit warren of homes in every condition of neglect, disrepair and careful upkeep.

Dives, carefully repaired huts, and nicely painted and ornamented cottages were jumbled together cheek by jowl with little distinction.

The best could not escape from the worst and the worst nestled cosily beside the better.

The yards, front and back, were narrow;;

some were trash dumps, some had flower gardens.

Behind were privies, for there was no sewage system.

After looking about a bit, Wilson discovered beyond Black Bottom, across the river and far removed from the white city, a considerable tract of land, and it occurred to him that the church and the better Negro homes might gradually be moved to this plot.

He talked about it to the Presiding Elder.

The Presiding Elder looked him over rather carefully.

He was not sure what kind of a man he had in hand.

But there was one thing that he had to stress, and that was that the contribution to the general church expenses, the dollar money, had been seriously falling behind in this church, and that must be looked after immediately.

In fact, he intimated clearly that that was the reason that Wilson had been sent here -- to make a larger contribution of dollar money.

Wilson stressed the fact that clear as this was, they must have a better church, a more business-like conduct of the church organization, and an effort to get this religious center out of its rut of wild worship into a modern church organization.

He emphasized to the Presiding Elder the plan of giving up the old church and moving across the river.

The Presiding Elder was sure that that would be impossible.

But he told Wilson to `` go ahead and try ''.

And Wilson tried.

It did seem impossible.

The bank which held the mortgage on the old church declared that the interest was considerably in arrears, and the real estate people said flatly that the land across the river was being held for an eventual development for white working people who were coming in, and that none would be sold to colored folk.

When it was proposed to rebuild the church, Wilson found that the terms for a new mortgage were very high.

He was sure that he could do better if he went to Atlanta to get the deal financed.

But when this proposal was made to his Deacon Board, he met unanimous opposition.

The church certainly would not be removed.

The very proposition was sacrilege.

It had been here fifty years.

It was going to stay forever.

It was hardly possible to get any argument on the subject.

As for rebuilding, well, that might be looked into, but there was no hurry, no hurry at all.

Wilson again went downtown to a different banker, an intelligent young white man who seemed rather sympathetic, but he shook his head.

`` Reverend '', he said, `` I think you don't quite understand the situation here.

Don't you see the amount of money that has been invested by whites around that church??

Tenements, stores, saloons, some gambling, I hope not too much.

The colored people are getting employment at Kent House and other places, and they are near their places of employment.

When a city has arranged things like this you cannot easily change them.

Now, if I were you I would just plan to repair the old church so it would last for five or ten years.

By that time, perhaps something better can be done ''.

Then Wilson asked, `` What about this Kent House which you mention??

I don't understand why a white hotel should be down here ''.

The young banker looked at him with a certain surprise, and then he said flatly: `` I'm afraid I can't tell you anything in particular about Kent House.

You'll have to find out about it on your own.

Hope to see you again ''.

And he dismissed the colored pastor.

It was next day that Sojourner came and sat beside him and took his hand.

She said, `` My dear, do you know what Kent House is ''??

`` No '', said Wilson, `` I don't.

I was just asking about it.

What is it ''??

`` It's a house of prostitution for white men with white girls as inmates.

They hire a good deal of local labor, including two members of our Trustee Board.

They buy some supplies from our colored grocers and they are patronized by some of the best white gentlemen in town ''.

Wilson stared at her.

`` My dear, you must be mistaken ''.

`` Talk to Mrs. Catt '', she said.

And after Wilson had talked to Mrs. Catt and to others, he was absolutely amazed.

This, of course, was the sort of thing that used to take place in Southern cities -- putting white houses of prostitution with colored girls in colored neighborhoods and carrying them on openly.

But it had largely disappeared on account of protest by the whites and through growing resentment on the part of the Negroes as they became more educated and got better wages.

But this situation of Kent House was more subtle.

The wages involved were larger and more regular.

The inmates were white and from out of town, avoiding local friction.

The backing from the white town was greater and there was little publicity.

Good wages, patronage and subscription of various kinds stopped open protest from Negroes.

And yet Wilson knew that this place must go or he must go.

And for him to leave this job now without accomplishing anything would mean practically the end of his career in the Methodist church, if not in all churches.

Payne dismounted in Madison Place and handed the reins to Herold.

There was a fog, which increased the darkness of the night.

Two gas lamps were no more than a misleading glow.

He might have been anywhere or nowhere.

The pretence was that he was delivering a prescription from Dr. Verdi.

Secretary of State Seward was a sick man.

The idea had come from Herold, who had once been a chemist's clerk.

The sick were always receiving medicines.

No one would question such an errand.

The bottle was filled up with flour.

Before Payne loomed the Old Clubhouse, Seward's home, where Key had once been killed.

Now it would have another death.

From the outside it was an ordinary enough house of the gentry.

He clomped heavily up the stoop and rang the bell.

Like the bell at Mass, the doorbell was pitched too high.

It was still Good Friday, after all.

A nigger boy opened the door.

Payne did not notice him.

He was thinking chiefly of Cap.

If their schedules were to synchronize, there was no point in wasting time.

He pushed his way inside.

For a moment the hall confused him.

This was the largest house he had ever been in, almost the largest building, except for a hotel.

He had no idea where Seward's room would be.

In the half darkness the banisters gleamed, and the hall seemed enormous.

Above him somewhere were the bedrooms.

Seward would be up there.

He explained his errand, but without bothering much to make it plausible, for he felt something well up in him which was the reason why he had fled the army.

He did not really want to kill, but as in the sexual act, there was a moment when the impulse took over and could not be downed, even while you watched yourself giving way to it.

He was no longer worried.

Everything would be all right.

He knew that in this mood he could not be stopped.

Still, the sensation always surprised him.

It was a thrill he felt no part in.

He could only watch with a sort of gentle dismay while his body did these quick, appalling, and efficient things.

He brushed by the idiotic boy and lumbered heavily up the stairs.

They were carpeted, but made for pumps and congress gaiters, not the great clodhoppers he wore.

The sound of his footsteps was like a muffled drum.

At the top of the stairs he ran into somebody standing there angrily in a dressing gown.

He stopped and whispered his errand.

Young Frederick Seward held out his hand.

Panting a little, Payne shook his head.

Dr. Verdi had told him to deliver his package in person.

Frederick Seward said his father was sleeping, and then went through a pantomime at his father's door, to prove the statement.

`` Very well '', Payne said.

`` I will go ''.

He smiled, but now that he knew where the elder Seward was, he did not intend to go.

He pulled out his pistol and fired it.

It made no sound.

It had misfired.

Reversing it, he smashed the butt down on Frederick Seward's head, over and over again.

It was the first blow that was always difficult.

After that, violence was exultantly easy.

He got caught up into it and became a different person.

Only afterwards did an act like that become meaningless, so that he would puzzle over it for days, whereas at the time it had seemed quite real.

The nigger boy fled down the stairs, screaming, `` Murder ''.

It was not murder at all.

Payne was more methodical than that.

He was merely clearing a way to what he had to do.

He ran for the sick room, found his pistol was broken, and threw it away.

A knife would do.

From childhood he had known all about knives.

Someone blocked the door from inside.

He smashed it in and tumbled into darkness.

He saw only dimly moving figures, but when he slashed them they yelled and fled.

He went for the bed, jumped on it, and struck where he could, repeatedly.

It was like finally getting into one's own nightmares to punish one's dreams.

Two men pulled him off.

Nobody said anything.

Payne hacked at their arms.

There was a lady there, in a nightdress.

He would not have wanted to hurt a lady.

Another man approached, this one fully dressed.

When the knife went into his chest, he went down at once.

`` I'm mad '', shouted Payne, as he ran out into the hall.

`` I'm mad '', and only wished he had been.

That would have made things so much easier.

But he was not mad.

He was only dreaming.

He clattered down the stairs and out of the door.

Somewhere in the fog, the nigger boy was still yelling murder.

One always wakes up, even from one's own dreams.

The clammy air revived him.

Herold, he saw, had fled.

Well, one did not expect much of people like Herold.

He unhitched his horse, walked it away, mounted, and spurred it on.

The nigger boy was close behind him.

Then the nigger boy turned back and he was alone.

He rode on and on.

He had no idea where he was.

After some time he came to an open field.

An open field was better than a building, that was for sure, so he dismounted, turned off the horse, and plunged through the grass.

He felt curiously sleepy, the world seemed far away;;

he knew he should get to Cap, but he didn't know how.

He was sure, for he had done as he was told, hadn't he??

Cap would find him and take care of him.

So choosing a good tree, he clambered up into it, found a comfortable notch, and curled up in it to sleep, like the tousled bear he was, with his hands across his chest, as though surfeited with honey.

Violence always made him tired, but he was not frightened.

In Boston, Edwin Booth was winding up a performance of A New Way To Pay Old Debts.

It was a part so familiar to him that he did not bother to think about it any more.

Acting soothed him.

On a stage he always knew what to do, and tonight, to judge by the applause, he must be doing it better than usual.

As Sir Giles Overreach( how often had he had to play that part, who did not believe a word of it), he raised his arm and declaimed: `` Where is my honour now ''??

That was one of the high spots of the play.

The audience, as usual, loved it.

He was delighted to see them so happy.

If he had any worries, it was only the small ones, about Mother in New York, and his daughter Edwina and what she might be doing at this hour, with her Aunt Asia, in Philadelphia.

Everyone is ambivalent about his profession, if he has practised it long enough, but there were still moments when he loved the stage and all those unseen people out there, who might cheer you or boo you, but that was largely, though not entirely, up to you.

They made the world seem friendly somehow, though he knew it was not.

7,

Wilkes was quite right about one thing.

Laura Keene had been in the green room.

The commotion had brought her into the wings.

Since she could not act, one part suited her as well as any other, and so she was the first person to offer Mr. Lincoln a glass of water, holding it up to the box, high above her head, to Miss Harris, who had asked for it.

She had been one of the first to collect her wits.

It was not so much that the shot had stunned the audience, as that they had been stunned already.

Most of them had seen Our American Cousin before, and unless Miss Keene was on stage, there was not much to it.

The theatre was hot and they were drugged with boredom.

The stage had been empty, except for Harry Hawk, doing his star monologue.

The audience was fond of Harry Hawk, he was a dear, in or out of character, but he was not particularly funny.

At the end of the monologue the audience would applaud.

Meanwhile it looked at the scenery.

`` Well, I guess I know enough to turn you inside out, you sockdologizing old mantrap ''!!

Said Trenchard, otherwise Hawk.

There was always a pause here, before the next line.

That was when the gun went off.

Yet even that explosion did not mean much.

Guns were going off all over Washington City these days, because of the celebrations, and the theatre was not soundproof.

Then the audience saw a small, dim figure appear at the edge of the Presidential box.

`` Sic semper tyrannis '', it said mildly.

Booth had delivered his line.

Behind him billowed a small pungent cloud of smoke.

They strained forward.

They had not heard what had been said.

They had been sitting too long to be able to stand up easily.

The figure leapt from the box, almost lost its balance, the flag draped there tore in the air, the figure landed on its left leg, fell on its hands, and pressed itself up.

Harry Hawk still had his arm raised towards the wings.

His speech faltered.

He did not lower his arm.

The figure was so theatrically dressed, that it was as though a character from some other play had blundered into this one.

The play for Saturday night was to be a benefit performance of The Octoroon.

This figure looked like the slave dealer from that.

But it also looked like a toad, hopping away from the light.

There was something maimed and crazy about its motion that disturbed them.

Then it disappeared into the wings.

Harry Hawk had not shifted position, but he at last lowered his arm.

Mrs. Lincoln screamed.

There was no mistaking that scream.

It was what anyone who had ever seen her had always expected her to do.

Yet this scream had a different note in it.

That absence of an urgent self-indulgence dashed them awake like a pail of water.

Clara Harris, one of the guests in the box, stood up and demanded water.

Her action was involuntary.

When something unexpected happened, one always asked for water if one were a woman, brandy if one were a man.

Mrs. Lincoln screamed again.

In the Presidential box someone leaned over the balustrade and yelled: `` He has shot the President ''!!

That got everybody up.

On the stage, Harry Hawk began to weep.

Laura Keene brushed by him with the glass of water.

The crowd began to move.

In Washington City everyone lived in a bubble of plots, and one death might attract another.

It was not exactly panic they gave way to, but they could not just sit there.

The beehive voices, for no one could bear silence, drowned out the sound of Mrs. Lincoln's weeping.

At the rear of the auditorium, upstairs, some men tried to push open the door to the box corridor.

It would not give.

A Dr. Charles Taft clambered up on the stage and got the actors to hoist him up to the box.

In the audience a man named Ferguson lost his head and tried to rescue a little girl from the mob, on the same principle which had led Miss Harris to demand water.

Someone opened the corridor door from the inside, and called for a doctor.

Somehow Dr. Charles Leale was forced through the mob and squeezed out into the dingy corridor.

He went straight to the Presidential box.

As usual, Mrs. Lincoln had lost her head, but nobody blamed her for doing so now.

There was a little blood on the hem of her dress, for the assassin had slashed Miss Harris's companion, Major Rathbone, with a knife.

Rathbone said he was bleeding to death.

By the look of him he wasn't that far gone.

With a sneer, the man spread his legs and, a third time, confronted them.

Once more, Katie reared, and whinnied in fear.

For a moment, boy and mount hung in midair.

Stevie twisted and, frantically, commanded the mare to leap straight ahead.

But the stranger was nimbler still.

With a bold arm, he dared once more to obstruct them.

Katie reared a third time, then, trembling, descended.

The stranger leered.

Seizing the bridle, he tugged with all his might and forced Katie to her knees.

It was absurd.

Stevie could feel himself toppling.

He saw the ground coming up -- and the stranger's head.

With incredible ferocity, he brought his fists together and struck.

The blow encountered silky hair and hard bone.

The man uttered a weird cry, spun about, and collapsed in the sand.

Katie scrambled to her feet, Stevie agilely retaining his seat.

Again Katie reared, and now, wickedly, he compelled her to bring her hooves down again and again upon the sprawled figure of the stranger.

He could feel his own feet, iron-shod, striking repeatedly until the body was limp.

He gloated, and his lips slavered.

He heard himself chortling.

They rode around and around to trample the figure into the sand.

Only the top of the head, with a spot bare and white as a clamshell, remained visible.

Stevie was shouting triumphantly.

A train hooted.

Instantly, he chilled.

They were pursuing him.

He was frightened;;

his fists clutched so tightly that his knuckles hurt.

Then Katie stumbled, and again he was falling, falling!!

`` Stevie!!

Stevie ''!!

His mother was nudging him, but he was still falling.

His head hung over the boards of Katie's stall;;

before it was sprawled the mangled corpse of the bearded stranger.

`` Stevie, wake up now!!

We're nearly there ''.

He had been dreaming.

He was safe in his Mama's arms.

The train had slowed.

Houses winked as the cars rolled beside a little depot.

`` Po' Chavis ''!!

The trainman called.

He came by and repeated, `` Po' Chavis ''!!

Chapter 6

Bong!!

Bong!!

Startled him awake.

The room vibrated as if a giant hand had rocked it.

Bong!!

A dull boom and a throbbing echo.

The walls bulged, the floor trembled, the windowpanes rattled.

He stared at the far morning, expecting a pendulum to swing across the horizon.

Bong!!

He raced to the window and yanked at the sash.

Bong!!

The wood was old, the paint alligatored.

Bong!!

A fresh breeze saluted him.

Six o'clock!!

He put his head out.

There was the slate roof of the church;;

ivy climbed the red brick walls like a green-scaled monster.

The clock which had struck presented an innocent face.

In the kitchen Mama was wiping the cupboards.

`` There's a tower and a steeple on the church a million feet high.

And the loudest clock in the whole world ''!!

`` I know, Stephen '', she smiled.

`` They say that our steeple is one hundred and sixty-two feet high.

The clock you heard strike -- it's really the town clock -- was installed last April by Mrs. Shorter, on her birthday ''.

He dressed, and sped outdoors.

He crossed Broome Street to Orange Square.

The steeple leaned backward, while the church advanced like a headless creature in a long, shapeless coat.

The spire seemed to hold up the sky.

Port Jervis, basking in the foothills, was the city of God.

The Dutch Reformed Church, with two steeples and its own school was on Main Street;;

the Episcopal Church was one block down Sussex Street;;

the Catholic Saint Mary's Church, with an even taller steeple and a cross on top, stood on Ball Street.

The Catholics had the largest cemetery, near the Neversink River where Main Street ran south;;

Stevie whistled when he passed these alien grounds.

God was everywhere, in the belfry, in the steeple, in the clouds, in the trees, and in the mountains hulking on the horizon.

Somewhere, beyond, where shadows lurked, must be the yawning pit of which Papa preached and the dreadful Lake of Fire.

So, walking in awe, he became familiar with God, who resided chiefly in Drew Centennial Church with its high steeple and clock.

There was no church like Drew Church, no preacher like Papa, who was intimate with Him, and could consign sinners to hellfire.

To know God he must follow in Papa's footsteps.

He was fortunate, and proud.

The veterans, idling on their benches in the Square, beneath the soldiers' monument, got to their feet when Papa approached: `` Morning, Reverend ''!!

His being and His will -- Stevie could not divide God from his Papa -- illumined every parish face, turned the choir into a band of angels, and the pulpit into the tollgate to Heaven.

`` We have nine hundred and eleven members in our charge '', Mama announced, `` and three hundred and eighty Sunday-school scholars ''.

When Papa went out to do God's work, Stevie often accompanied him in the buggy, which was drawn by Violet, the new black mare.

Although they journeyed westerly as far as Germantown, beyond the Erie roundhouse and the machine shop, and along the Delaware and Hudson Canal, and northward to Brooklyn, below Point Peter, he could see the church spire wherever he looked back.

Sometimes they went south and rolled past the tollhouse -- `` Afternoon, Reverend ''!!

-- and crossed the suspension bridge to Matamoras;;

that was Pennsylvania.

In the Delaware River, three long islands were overgrown with greening trees and underbrush.

South of Laurel Grove Cemetery, and below the junction of the Neversink and the Delaware, was the Tri-State Rock, from which Stevie could spy New Jersey and Pennsylvania, as well as New York, simply by spinning around on his heel.

On these excursions, Papa instructed him on man's chief end, which was his duty to God and his own salvation.

However, a boy's lively eyes might rove.

Where Cuddleback Brook purled into the Neversink was a magnificent swimming hole.

Papa pointed a scornful finger at the splashing youth: `` Idle recreation ''!!

Stevie saw no idols;;

it troubled him that he couldn't always see what Papa saw.

He was torn between the excitement in the sun-inflamed waters and a little engine chugging northward on the Monticello Branch.

`` Where you been today ''??

Ludie inquired every evening, pretending that he did not care.

`` He'll make a preacher out of you ''!!

`` No, he won't ''!!

Stevie flared.

`` Not me ''!!

`` Somebody's got to be a preacher in the family.

He made a will and last testament before we left Paterson.

I heard them!!

Uncle and Aunt Howe were the witnesses ''.

`` Will he die ''??

`` Everybody does ''.

Ludie could be hateful.

To speak of Papa dying was a sin.

It could never happen as long as God was alert and the Drew steeple stood guard with its peaked lance.

Stevie was constantly slipping into the church.

He pulled with all his strength at the heavy, brass-bound door, and shuffled along the wainscoted wall.

The cold, mysterious presence of God was all around him.

At the end of a shaft of light, the pews appeared to be broad stairs in a long dungeon.

Far away, standing before a curtained window in the study room, was his father, hands tucked under his coattails, and staring into the dark church.

The figure was wreathed in an extraordinary luminescence.

The boy shuddered at the deathly pale countenance with its wrinkles and gray hair.

Would Papa really die??

The mouth was thin-lipped and wide, the long cleft in the upper lip like a slide.

When Papa's slender fingers removed the spectacles, there were red indentations on the bridge of the strong nose.

`` It's time you began to think on God, Stephen.

Perhaps one day He will choose you as He chose me, long ago.

Therefore, give Him your affection and store up His love for you.

Open your heart to Him and pray, Stephen, pray!!

For His mercy and His guidance to spare you from evil and eternal punishment in the Lake of Fire ''.

Stevie had heard these words many times, yet on each occasion they caused him to tremble.

For he feared the Lake of Fire.

He strove to think of God and His eternal wrath;;

he must pray to be spared.

Papa was disappointed that none of the brothers had heard the Call.

Not George, Townley, or Ted, certainly not Ludie.

Burt was at Hackettstown and Will at Albany Law School, where they surely could not hear it.

Someday God would choose him.

He would hear the Call and would run to tell Papa.

The stern face would relax, the black-clad arms would embrace him, `` My son ''!!

Yet how might he know the Call when it came??

Probably, as in Scriptures, a still, small voice would whisper.

It would summon him once;;

if he missed it, never again.

What if it came when he was playing, or was asleep and dreaming??

He must not fail to hear it.

He was Papa's chosen;;

therefore, nothing but good could happen to him, even in God's wrathful storms.

When the skies grew dark and thunder rolled across the valley, he was unafraid.

Aggie might fly into a closet, shut the door and bury her head in the clothes;;

he dared to wait for the lightning.

Lightning could strike you blind if you were a sinner!!

But he was good.

He clenched his fists and faced the terror.

Thunder crashed;;

barrels tumbled down the mountainsides, and bounced and bounced till their own fury split them open.

Lightning might strike the steeples of the other churches;;

not of Drew Church.

A flash illumined the trees as a crooked bolt twigged in several directions.

Violet whinnied from the stable.

He ran out into the downpour, sped across the yard and into the buggy room.

`` Don't be afraid, Violet ''!!

He shouted, and was aghast at the echoes.

`` Don't you be afraid ''!!

He would save her.

If there was a fire or a flood he would save Mama first and Violet next.

Drenched and shaking, he stood near the sweet-smelling stall and dared to pat her muzzle.

`` Don't you be afraid, Violet ''!!

After the storm, the sky cleared blue and cool, and fragrant air swept the hills.

When the sun came out, Stevie strode proudly into Orange Square, smiling like a landlord on industrious tenants.

The fountain had brimmed over, the cannon were wet, the soldiers' monument glistened.

Even before the benches had dried, the Civil War veterans were straggling back to their places.

The great spire shone as if the lightning had polished it.

He jumped.

The pointed shadow had nearly touched him.

He trailed Ludie to the baseball game in the lot on Kingston Street near the Dutch Reformed.

`` Go on home ''!!

Ludie screeched at him.

`` Someone'll tell Papa ''!!

No one told on Ludie, not even when he slipped live grasshoppers into the mite-box.

Ludie did as he pleased.

Ludie took his slingshot and climbed to the rooftop to shoot at crows.

Ludie chewed roofer's tar.

Ludie had a cigar box full of marbles and shooters, and a Roman candle from last Fourth of July.

Ludie hopped rides on freight cars, and was chased by Mr. Yankton, the railroad guard.

He came home overheated, ran straight to the ice-chest, and gulped shivery cold water.

Stevie envied him.

That Ludie!!

He, too, cocked his cap at a jaunty angle, jingled marbles in his pocket, and swaggered down Main Street.

On the Christophers' lawn, little girls in white pinafores were playing grownups at a tea party.

A Newfoundland sat solemnly beside a doghouse half his size.

Stevie yearned for a dog.

He wondered whether God had a dog in the sky.

He meandered down Pike Street, past the First National Bank with its green window shades.

He crossed the tracks to Delaware House, where ladies in gay dresses and men in straw boaters and waxed mustaches crowded the verandah.

A tall lady, with a ruffled collar very low on her bosom, turned insolent green eyes upon him.

She was taller than Aggie.

She was so beautiful with her rosy mouth and haughty air that she had to be wicked.

Fiddles screeched;;

a piano tinkled.

`` P. J. '' -- as Ludie called the town -- was crowded with summer people who came to the mountains to escape the heat in the big cities.

They stayed at hotels and boardinghouses, or at private homes.

Rich people went to Delaware House, Opera House, American House or Fowler House.

If the crummy bastard could write!!

That's how it should be.

It's those two fucken niggers!!

Krist, I wish they could write!!

Nigger pussy.

He thought of sweet wet nigger pussy.

Oh, sweet land of heaven, haint there just nothin like sweet nigger pussy!!

He thought of her, the first one.

He had caught her coming out of the shack.

She was a juicy one.

Oh how they bounced!!

Fresh, warm, sweet and juicy, sweet lovin sixteen, she was.

Man, how I love nigger pussy!!

The snow came a little faster now, he noted.

He thought of Joe Harris, the nigger who had gone after his sister.

He chuckled, the memory vivid.

Jee-sus, We Fixed him!!

Yooee, we fixed him!!

The snow again.

If only the fucken weather wasn't so lousy!!

Goddamn niggers, Lord.

What I have to put up with!!

Sonuvabitch, I can't figure out what in hell for they went and put niggers in my squad for.

Only one worth a shit, and that's Brandon.

He ain't so bad.

His thoughts turned to other things.

The big shock everybody had when they found ol Slater and those others done for.

Kaboom for.

He had been pretty scared himself, wondering what the hell was coming off.

But he soon saw which way the ball was bouncing.

Soon came back to his senses.

`` I soon came back to my senses '', he said, aloud, to the young blizzard, proudly, drawing himself up, as if making a report to some important superior.

I was the first to get my squad on the ball, and anybody thinkin it was easy is pretty damn dumb.

Look at thum.

That goddamn redheader was the worst.

He kept sayin, not me, not me, I don't wanta wind up like em.

But I told him, goddammit.

`` I told him '', he said aloud They'll get the guys that done it.

That'll put the place back to normal.

Normal, by God.

Maybe it's a good thing it happened.

Maybe they'll stop it now, once for all.

Clean the place up.

They're doin it now.

I hear the whole bunch is croakin out in the snow.

They'll get the guys that done it.

There was something troubling him though: as yet they hadn't Five days.

Keerist.

Prickly twinges of annoyance ran through him.

His eyes blinked hard, snapping on and squashing some bad things that were trying to push their way into him.

A tune began to whirl inside his head.

One of his favorites: `` Guitar Boogie ''.

It always came on, faithfully, just like a radio or juke box, whenever he started to worry too much about something, when the bad things tried to push their way into him.

The music drove them off, or away, and he was free to walk on air in a very few moments, humming and jiving within, beating the rhythm within.

He glowed with anticipation about what would happen to the culprits when they caught them.

Turn the bastards over to me -- to me and my boys -- no nigger ever got what would be comin to them -- reactionary bastards.

He had never heard the word reactionary before his life as a POW began.

It was a word he was proud of, a word that meant much to him, and he used it with great pleasure, almost as if it were an exclusive possession, and more: he sensed himself to be very highly educated, four cuts above any of the folks back home.

`` Four cuts at least '', he chuckled to himself, `` and I owe it all to them ''.

The word also made him feel hate, sincere hate, for those so labeled.

He used it very effectively when he wanted to get his squad on the ball.

It came up again and again in the discussion sessions.

Lousy Reactionary bastards been tryin to fuck up the Program for months.

Months.

Hired, hard lackeys of the Warmongering capitalists.

Not captured, sent here.

To fuck up the program.

You guys remember that.

Remember that He heard himself haranguing them.

He saw himself before them delivering the speech.

He laughed, suddenly, feeling a surge of power telling him of his hold over them, seeing himself before them, receiving utmost respect and attention.

One day, Ching had told him( smiling, patting him on the back) as they walked to the weekly conference of squad leaders, `` Keep it up, your squad is good, one of the best, keep it up, keep up the good work ''.

He would!!

That was really something, coming from Ching.

`` Really something '', he said, aloud.

Dirty Reactionary bastards comin down here in the night and bumpin off ol Slater and those other poor bastards.

`` They'll get them by God and let them bring them down here to me, just let them, God, I'll slice their balls right off.

'' His arm moved swiftly, violently, once, twice.

He felt intense satisfaction.

He was tingling within.

Before him, mutilated, bleeding to death, they lay.

It was as if it had been done.

`` Bastards '', he said aloud, spitting on them.

He halted, and looked around.

Rivers of cold sweat were suddenly unleashed within him.

The thought came back, the one nagging at him these past four days.

He tried to stifle it.

But the words were forming.

He knew he couldn't.

He braced himself.

Somebody'll hafta start thinkin.

He fought it, seeking to kill the last few words, but on they came out.

He was trembling, a strange feeling upon him, fully expecting some catastrophe to strike him dead on the spot.

But it didn't.

And he took heart;;

the final word came forth.

Now he heard it, fully;;

`` bout takin his place '' He listened, waited, nothing happened.

He felt good.

His old self.

The music arrived, taking him its rhythm.

Stroked him, snaked all through him, the lyrics lifted him, took him from one magic isle to another, stopping briefly at each Brandon.

He is good.

Damn good.

But a nigger.

Johnson.

Jesus, the guy says he is trying.

But he isn't with it, not at all with it.

When I talked to Ching about it, he said, Everyone can learn, if he is not a Reactionary or lazy.

No one is stupid.

That's what he said.

He oughta know.

It is plain as hell Johnson is no reactionary.

So you're not tryin, Johnson, you bastard you.

He looked over at him, lying there, asleep, and he felt a wave of revulsion.

How he loathed him.

Sleepy-eyed, soft-spoken Johnson, Biggest thorn in my side of the whole fucken squad.

He was the guy what always goofed at Question Time.

Why couldn't they have dumped him off on someone else??

Why me??

Why didn't the damn Reactionaries bump him off??

Why Slater??

Like a particle drawn to a magnet he returned to that which was pressing so hard in his mind.

The music surged up, but it failed to check it.

Who is the man to take His place??

The guy with most on the Ball.

Most on the ball.

Handle men.

Thoroughly Wised up.

Knows the score With a supreme effort, he broke it off.

He turned to the window again.

A gnawing and gnashing within him.

The snow was tumbling down furiously now.

Huge glob-flakes hitting the ground, piling higher and higher.

He stared at it, amazed, alarmed.

The whole fucken sky's cavin in!!

Keeeerist!!

Lookit it!!

Cover the whole building, bury us all, by nightfall.

Jesus!!

Somebody, got to be somebody If I don't put my two cents in soon, somebody else will I know they're waitin only for one thing: for the bastards what done it to be nailed.

Maybe they already got them.

He was again tingling with pleasure, seeing himself clearly in Slater's shoes.

Top dog, sleeping and eating right there with the Staff.

Ching, Tien, all of them.

Top dog.

Poor ol Slater.

Jesus, imagine, the crummy bastards, they'll get em, they'll get what's comin to em.

He whirled about suddenly.

It was nothing, though his heart was thumping wildly.

Somebody was up.

That was all.

`` Boy, you're stirrin early '', a sleepy voice said.

`` Yehhh '', said Coughlin, testily, eyeing him up and down.

`` Lookit that come down, willya '', said the man, scratching himself, yawning.

`` Yehhh '', said Coughlin, practically spitting on him.

The man moved away.

That's the way.

They'll toe the line.

Goddamn it.

Keep the chatter to a minimum, short answers, one word, if possible.

Less bull the more you can do with em.

That's Brown's trouble.

All he does is to bullshit with his squad, and they are the stupidest bastards around.

Just about to get their asses kicked into hut Seven.

Plenty of room there now.

All those dumb 8-Balls croaked.

You can do anything with these dumb fucks if you know how.

Anything.

They'd cut their mothers' belly open.

Give um the works.

See, he's already snapping it up, the dumb jerk.

Coughlin grinned, feeling supremely on top of things.

He watched the snow once again.

It infuriated him.

It made no sense to him.

He whirled around, suddenly hot all over, finding the man who had been standing before him a few moments back, nailing him to the spot on which he now stood, open-mouthed.

`` You, Listen!!

-- name William Foster's Four Internal Contradictions in Capitalism.

Quick -- Quick -- now ''!!

The man shrank before the hot fury, searching frantically for the answer.

Finnegan woke up.

There was a hell of a noise this time of morning.

He stared out the window.

For Christ's sake!!

The whole fucken sky's caved in!!

He looked for the source of the noise that had awakened him.

It was that prick Coughlin.

What the hell was he up to now??

Why didn't he drop dead??

How did they miss him when they got Slater??

How??

Then he was asking himself the usual early morning questions: What the Hell am I doin here??

Is this a nut-house??

Am I nuts??

Is this for real??

Am I dreamin??

From somewhere in the hut came Coughlin's voice.

`` How long did you study??

How long, buddy ''??

`` For Christ's sake ''!!

A voice pleaded.

`` Don't Christsake me, buddy!!

Just answer.

C'mon -- 'mon!!

''

I'm no hero.

Did I start the damn war??

Automatically, Finnegan started going over today's lesson.

Capitalism rots from the core.

Did I start the damn war??

Who did??

That's a good one.

I thought I knew.

Why don't Uncle Sam mind his own fucken business??

I'll bet both together did.

I bet.

So fuck them both.

Goddamn.

Goddammit.

Just let me go home to Jersey, back to the shore, oh, Jesus, the shore.

The waves breakin in on you and your girl at night there on the warm beach in the moonlight.

If I hafta do this to stay alive by God I'll do it.

I hated the goddamn army from the first day I got in anyhow.

All pricks like Coughlin run it anyway, one way or another.

Fuck them.

He rolled over and tried to shut out the noise, now much louder.

He snuggled into the blanket.

Brandon dreamed.

He was sitting on top of a log which was spinning round and around in the water.

A river, wide as the Missouri, where it ran by his place.

The log was spinning.

But he was not.

So what??

Why should I be spinning just because the goddamn log is spinning??

( he asked this out loud, but no one heard it over the other noise in the hut).

Over on the bank, the west bank, a man stood, calling to him.

He couldn't make out what he was saying.

No doubt it had to do with the log.

Why should he be concerned??

Rousseau is so persuasive that Voltaire is almost convinced that he should burn his books, too.

But while the two men are riding into the country, where they are going to dinner, they are attacked in the dark of the forest by a band of thieves, who strip them of everything, including most of their clothes.

`` You must be a very learned man '', says Voltaire to one of the bandits.

`` A learned man ''??

The bandit laughs in his face.

But Voltaire perseveres.

He goes to the chief himself.

`` At what university did you study ''??

He asks.

He refuses to believe that the bandit chief never attended a higher institution.

`` To have become so corrupt '', he says, `` surely you must have studied many arts and sciences ''.

The chief, annoyed by these questions, knocks Voltaire down and shouts at him that he not only never went to any school, but never even learned how to read.

When finally the two bedraggled men reach their friend's home, Voltaire's fears are once again aroused.

For it is such a distinguished place, with such fine works of art and such a big library, that there can be little doubt but that the owner has become depraved by all this culture.

To Voltaire's surprise, however, their host gives them fresh clothes to put on, opens his purse to lend them money and sits them down before a good dinner.

Immediately after dinner, however, Rousseau asks for still another favor.

Could he have pen and paper, please??

He is in a hurry to write another essay against culture.

Such was the impromptu that Voltaire gave to howls of laughter at Sans Souci and that was soon circulated in manuscript throughout the literary circles of Europe, to be printed sometime later, but with the name of Timon of Athens, the famous misanthrope, substituted for that of Rousseau.

How cruel!!

But at the same time how understandable.

How could the rich, for whom life was made so simple, ever understand the subterfuges, the lies, the frauds, the errors, sins and even crimes to which the poor were driven in their efforts to overcome the great advantages the rich had in the race of life??

How, for example, could a Voltaire understand the strange predicament in which a Rousseau would find himself when, soon after the furor of his first Discourse, he acquired still another title to fame??

This time as a musician.

As a composer.

Ever since he had first begun to study music and to teach it, Rousseau had dreamed of piercing through to fame as the result of a successful opera.

But his facility in this genre was not great.

And his efforts to get a performance for his Gallant Muses invariably failed.

And for good reasons.

His operatic music had little merit.

But then one day, while on a week's visit to the country home of a retired Swiss jeweler, Rousseau amused the company with a few little melodies he had written, to which he attached no great importance.

He was really amazed to discover the other guests so excited about these delicate little songs.

`` Put a few such songs together '', they urged him.

`` String them onto some sort of little plot, and you'll have a delightful operetta ''.

He didn't believe them.

`` Nonsense '', he said.

`` This is the sort of stuff I write and then throw away ''!!

`` Heaven forbid ''!!

Cried the ladies, enchanted by his music.

`` You must make an opera out of this material ''.

And they wouldn't leave off arguing and pleading until he had promised.

Oh, the irony and the bitterness of it!!

That after all his years of effort to become a composer, he should now, now when he was still stoutly replying to the critics of his Discourse on the Arts and Sciences, be so close to a success in music and have to reject it.

Or at least appear to reject it!!

But what else could he do??

You couldn't on the one hand decry the arts and at the same time practice them, could you??

Well, yes, perhaps in literature, since you could argue that you couldn't keep silent about your feelings against literature and so were involved in spite of yourself.

But now music too??

No.

That would be too much!!

And the fault, of course, was Rameau's.

The fault was Rameau's and that of the whole culture of this Parisian age.

For it was Rameau's type of music that he had been trying to write, and that he couldn't write.

These little songs, however, were sweet nothings from the heart, tender memories of his childhood, little melodies that anyone could hum and that would make one want to weep.

But no.

He couldn't appear as a composer now.

That glory, craved for so long, was now forbidden to him.

Still, just for the ladies, and just for this once, for this one weekend in the country, he would make a little piece out of his melodies.

The ladies were delighted and Jean Jacques was applauded.

And everyone went to work to learn the parts which he wrote.

But then, after the little operetta had been given its feeble amateur rendering, everyone insisted that it was too good to be lost forever, and that the Royal Academy of Music must now have the manuscript in order to give it the really first-rate performance it merited.

Rousseau was aware that he must seem like a hypocrite, standing there and arguing that he could not possibly permit a public performance.

The ladies especially couldn't understand what troubled him.

A contradiction??

Bah, what was a contradiction in one's life??

Every woman has had the experience of saying no when she meant yes, and saying yes when she meant no.

Rousseau had to admit that though he couldn't agree to a public performance, he would indeed, just for his own private satisfaction, dearly love to know how his work would sound when done by professional musicians and by trained voices.

`` I'd simply like to know if it is as good as you kind people seem to think '', he said.

Duclos, the historian, pointed out to Jean Jacques that this was impossible.

The musicians of the Royal Opera would not rehearse a work merely to see how it would sound.

Merely to satisfy the author's curiosity.

Rousseau agreed.

But he recalled that Rameau had once had a private performance of his opera Armide, behind closed doors, just for himself alone.

Duclos understood what was bothering Rousseau: that the writer of the Prosopopoeia of Fabricius should now become known as the writer of an amusing little operetta.

That would certainly be paradoxical.

But Duclos thought he saw a way out.

`` Let me do the submitting to the Royal Academy '', he suggested.

`` Your name will never appear.

No one will even suspect that it is your work ''.

To that Rousseau could agree.

But now what crazy twists and turns of his emotions!!

Afraid at one and the same time that his work might be turned down -- which would be a blow to his pride even though no one knew he was the author -- and that the work would be accepted, and then that his violent feelings in the matter would certainly betray how deeply concerned he was in spite of himself.

And how anxious this lover of obscurity was for applause!!

And thus torn between his desire to be known as the composer of a successful opera and the necessity of remaining true to his proclaimed desire for anonymity, Rousseau suffered through several painful weeks.

All these emotions were screwed up to new heights when, after acceptance and the first rehearsals, there ensued such a buzz of excitement among Parisian music lovers that Duclos had to come running to Rousseau to inform him that the news had reached the superintendent of the King's amusements, and that he was now demanding that the work be offered first at the royal summer palace of Fontainebleau.

Imagine the honor of it!!

`` What was your answer ''??

Jean Jacques asked, striving to appear unimpressed.

`` I refused '', Duclos said.

`` What else could I do??

Monsieur De Cury was incensed, of course.

But I said I would first have to get the author's permission.

And I was certain he would refuse ''.

How infuriating all this was!!

Why had not this success come to him before he had plunged into his Discourse, and before he had committed himself to a life of austerity and denial??

Now, when everything was opening up to him -- even the court of Louis 15!!

-- he had to play a role of self-effacement.

Back and forth Duclos had to go, between M. De Cury and Jean Jacques and between the Duke D'Aumont and Jean Jacques again, as his little operetta, The Village Soothsayer, though still unperformed, took on ever more importance.

And of course the news of who the composer was did finally begin to get around among his closest friends.

But they, naturally, kept his secret well, and the public at large knew only of a great excitement in musical and court circles.

How titillating it was to go among people who did not know him as the composer, but who talked in the most glowing terms of the promise of the piece after having heard the first rehearsals.

The furor was such that people who could not possibly have squirmed their way into the rehearsals were pretending that they were intimate with the whole affair and that it would be sensational.

And listening to such a conversation one morning while taking a cup of chocolate in a cafe, Rousseau found himself bathed in perspiration, trembling lest his authorship become known, and at the same time dreaming of the startling effect he would make if he should proclaim himself suddenly as the composer.

He felt himself now, as he himself says in his Confessions, at a crucial point of his life.

And that was why, on the day of the performance, when a carriage from the royal stables called to take him to the palace, he did not bother to shave.

On the contrary, he was pleased that his face showed a neglect of several days.

Seeing him in that condition, and about to enter the hall where the King, the Queen, the whole royal family and all the members of the highest aristocracy would be present, Grimm and the Abbe Raynal and others tried to stop him.

`` You can't go in that way ''!!

They cried.

`` Why not ''??

Jean Jacques asked.

`` Who is going to stop me ''??

`` You haven't dressed for the occasion ''!!

They pointed out to him.

`` I'm dressed as I always am '', Rousseau said.

`` Neither better nor worse ''.

`` At home, yes '', they argued.

`` But here you are in the palace.

There's the King.

And Madame De Pompadour ''.

`` If they are here, then surely I have the right to be here '', Rousseau said.

`` And even more right.

Since I am the composer ''!!

`` But in such a slovenly condition ''.

`` What is slovenly about me ''??

Rousseau asked.

`` Is it because of my slovenliness that hair grows on my face??

Surely it would grow there whether I washed myself or not.

A hundred years ago I would have worn a beard with pride.

And those without beards would have stood out as not dressed for the occasion.

Now times have changed, and I must pretend that hair doesn't grow on my face.

That's the fashion.

And fashion is the real king here.

Not Louis 15,, since even he obeys.

Now, if you don't mind, I should like to hear my own piece performed ''.

But of course behind his boldness he didn't feel bold at all.

He trembled lest his piece should fail.

And this in addition to his usual fear of being among people of high society, his fear of making some inane or inappropriate remark.

And even deeper than that: his fear lest in this closed hall he should suddenly itch to relieve himself.

Could he walk out in the midst of his piece??

Here, before the court??

Before the King??

It was the first time any of us had laughed since the morning began.

The rider from Concord was as good as his word.

He came spurring and whooping down the road, his horse kicking up clouds of dust, shouting:

`` They're a-coming!!

By God, they're a-coming, they are ''!!

We heard him before he ever showed, and we heard him yelling after he was out of sight.

Solomon Chandler hadn't misjudged the strength of his lungs, not at all.

I think you could have heard him a mile away, and he was bursting at every seam with importance.

I have observed that being up on a horse changes the whole character of a man, and when a very small man is up on a saddle, he'd like as not prefer to eat his meals there.

That's understandable, and I appreciate the sentiment.

As for this rider, I never saw him before or afterwards and never saw him dismounted, so whether he stood tall or short in his shoes, I can't say;;

but I do know that he gave the day tone and distinction.

The last thing in the world that resembled a war was our line of farmers and storekeepers and mechanics perched on top of a stone wall, and this dashing rider made us feel a good deal sharper and more alert to the situation.

We came down off the wall as if he had toppled all of us, and we crouched behind it.

I have heard people talk with contempt about the British regulars, but that only proves that a lot of people talk about things of which they are deplorably ignorant.

Whatever we felt about the redcoats, we respected them in terms of their trade, which was killing;;

and I know that I, myself, was nauseated with apprehension and fear and that my hands were soaking wet where they held my gun.

I wanted to wipe my flint, but I didn't dare to, the state my hands were in, just as I didn't dare to do anything about the priming.

The gun would fire or not, just as chance willed.

I put a lot more trust in my two legs than in the gun, because the most important thing I had learned about war was that you could run away and survive to talk about it.

The gunfire, which was so near that it seemed just a piece up the road now, stopped for long enough to count to twenty;;

and in that brief interval, a redcoat officer came tearing down the road, whipping his horse fit to kill.

I don't know whether he was after our rider, who had gone by a minute before, or whether he was simply scouting conditions;;

but when he passed us by, a musket roared, and he reared his horse, swung it around, and began to whip it back in the direction from which he had come.

He was a fine and showy rider, but his skill was wasted on us.

From above me and somewhere behind me, a rifle cracked.

The redcoat officer collapsed like a punctured bolster, and the horse reared and threw him from the saddle, except that one booted foot caught in the stirrup.

Half crazed by the weight dragging, the dust, and the heat, the horse leaped our wall, dashing out the rider's brains against it, and leaving him lying there among us -- while the horse crashed away through the brush.

It was my initiation to war and the insane symphony war plays;;

for what had happened on the common was only terror and flight;;

but this grinning, broken head, not ten feet away from me, was the sharp definition of what my reality had become.

And now the redcoats were coming, and the gunfire was a part of the dust cloud on the road to the west of us.

I must state that the faster things happened, the slower they happened;;

the passage and rhythm of time changed, and when I remember back to what happened then, each event is a separate and frozen incident.

In my recollection, there was a long interval between the death of the officer and the appearance of the first of the retreating redcoats, and in that interval the dust cloud over the road seems to hover indefinitely.

Yet it could not have been more than a matter of seconds, and then the front of the British army came into view.

It was only hours since I had last seen them, but they had changed and I had changed.

In the very front rank, two men were wounded and staggered along, trailing blood behind them.

No drummers here, no pipers, and the red coats were covered with a fine film of dust.

They marched with bayonets fixed, and as fixed on their faces was anger, fear, and torment.

Rank after rank of them came down the road, and the faces were all the same, and they walked in a sea of dust.

`` Committeemen, hold your fire!!

Hold your fire ''!!

A voice called, and what made it even more terrible and unreal was that the redcoat ranks never paused for an instant, only some of them glancing toward the stone wall, from behind which the voice came.

The front of their column had already passed us, when another officer came riding down the side of the road, not five paces from where we were.

My Cousin Simmons carried a musket, but he had loaded it with bird shot, and as the officer came opposite him, he rose up behind the wall and fired.

One moment there was a man in the saddle;;

the next a headless horror on a horse that bolted through the redcoat ranks, and during the next second or two, we all of us fired into the suddenly disorganized column of soldiers.

One moment, the road was filled with disciplined troops, marching four by four with a purpose as implacable as death;;

the next, a cloud of gun smoke covered a screaming fury of sound, out of which the redcoat soldiers emerged with their bayonets and their cursing fury.

In the course of this, they had fired on us;;

but I have no memory of that.

I had squeezed the trigger of my own gun, and to my amazement, it had fired and kicked back into my shoulder with the force of an angry mule;;

and then I was adding my own voice to the crescendo of sound, hurling more vile language than I ever thought I knew, sobbing and shouting, and aware that if I had passed water before, it was not enough, for my pants were soaking wet.

I would have stood there and died there if left to myself, but Cousin Simmons grabbed my arm in his viselike grip and fairly plucked me out of there;;

and then I came to some sanity and plunged away with such extraordinary speed that I outdistanced Cousin Simmons by far.

Everyone else was running.

Later we realized that the redcoats had stopped their charge at the wall.

Their only hope of survival was to hold to the road and keep marching.

We tumbled to a stop in Deacon Gordon's cow hole, a low-lying bit of pasture with a muddy pool of water in its middle.

A dozen cows mooed sadly and regarded us as if we were insane, as perhaps we were at that moment, with the crazy excitement of our first encounter, the yelling and shooting still continuing up at the road, and the thirst of some of the men, which was so great that they waded into the muddy water and scooped up handfuls of it.

Isaac Pitt, one of the men from Lincoln, had taken a musket ball in his belly;;

and though he had found the strength to run with us, now he collapsed and lay on the ground, dying, the Reverend holding his head and wiping his hot brow.

It may appear that we were cruel and callous, but no one had time to spend sympathizing with poor Isaac -- except the Reverend.

I know that I myself felt that it was a mortal shame for a man to be torn open by a British musket ball, as Isaac had been, yet I also felt relieved and lucky that it had been him and not myself.

I was drunk with excitement and the smell of gunpowder that came floating down from the road, and the fact that I was not afraid now, but only waiting to know what to do next.

Meanwhile, I reloaded my gun, as the other men were doing.

We were less than a quarter of a mile from the road, and we could trace its shape from the ribbon of powder smoke and dust that hung over it.

Wherever you looked, you saw Committeemen running across the meadows, some away from the road, some toward it, some parallel to it;;

and about a mile to the west a cluster of at least fifty Militia were making their way in our direction.

Cousin Joshua and some others felt that we should march toward Lexington and take up new positions ahead of the slow-moving British column, but another group maintained that we should stick to this spot and this section of road.

I didn't offer any advice, but I certainly did not want to go back to where the officer lay with his brains dashed out.

Someone said that while we were standing here and arguing about it, the British would be gone;;

but Cousin Simmons said he had watched them marching west early in the morning, and moving at a much brisker pace it had still taken half an hour for their column to pass, what with the narrowness of the road and their baggage and ammunition carts.

While this was being discussed, we saw the militia to the west of us fanning out and breaking into little clusters of two and three men as they approached the road.

It was the opinion of some of us that these must be part of the Committeemen who had been in the Battle of the North Bridge, which entitled them to a sort of veteran status, and we felt that if they employed this tactic, it was likely enough the best one.

Mattathias Dover said:

`` It makes sense.

If we cluster together, the redcoats can make an advantage out of it, but there's not a blessed thing they can do with two or three of us except chase us, and we can outrun them ''.

That settled it, and we broke into parties of two and three.

Cousin Joshua Dover decided to remain with the Reverend and poor Isaac Pitt until life passed away -- and he was hurt so badly he did not seem for long in this world.

I went off with Cousin Simmons, who maintained that if he didn't see to me, he didn't know who would.

`` Good heavens, Adam '', he said, `` I thought one thing you'd have no trouble learning is when to get out of a place ''.

`` I learned that now '', I said.

We ran east for about half a mile before we turned back to the road, panting from the effort and soaked with sweat.

There was a clump of trees that appeared to provide cover right up to the road, and the shouting and gunfire never slackened.

Under the trees, there was a dead redcoat, a young boy with a pasty white skin and a face full of pimples, who had taken a rifle ball directly between the eyes.

Three men were around him.

They had stripped him of his musket and equipment, and now they were pulling his boots and jacket off.

Cousin Simmons grabbed one of them by the shoulder and flung him away.

`` God's name, what are you to rob the dead with the fight going on ''!!

Cousin Simmons roared.

They tried to outface him, but Joseph Simmons was as wide as two average men, and it would have taken braver men than these were to outface him.

That summer the gambling houses were closed, despite the threats of Pierre Ameaux, a gaming-card manufacturer.

Dancing was no longer permitted in the streets.

The Bordel and other places of prostitution were emptied.

The slit breeches had to go.

Drunkenness was no longer tolerated.

In defiance, a chinless reprobate, Jake Camaret, marched down the aisle in St. Peter's one Sunday morning, followed by one of the women from the Bordel, whose dress and walk plainly showed the lack of any shame.

Plunking themselves down on the front bench, they turned to smirk at those around them.

John's first impulse was to denounce their blasphemy.

But the thought occurred that God would want this opportunity used to tell them about Him.

Calmly he opened the Bible and read of the woman at the well.

He finished the worship service as if there had been no brazen attempt to dishonor God and man.

The next morning, as the clock struck nine, he appeared at the Council meeting in the Town Hall and insisted that the couple would have to be punished if the Church was to be respected.

`` I have told you before, and I tell you again '', Monsieur Favre said rudely.

`` Stick to the preaching of the Gospel ''!!

John stiffened in anger.

`` That is the answer the ungodly will always make when the Church points its fingers at their sins.

I say to you that the Church will ever decry evil ''!!

John's reply was like a declaration of war.

Monsieur Favre sat down in his high-backed stall, lips compressed, eyes glinting.

Ablard Corne, a short man with a rotunda of stomach, rose.

Every eye was on him as he began to speak.

`` What Master Calvin says is true.

How can we have a good city unless we respect morality ''??

Abel Poupin, a tall man with sunken cheeks and deep-set eyes, got to his feet.

`` We all know that Jake Camaret and the woman are brazenly living together.

It would be well to show the populace how we deal with adulterers ''.

Philibert Berthelier, the son of the famous patriot, disagreed.

`` Do not listen to that Frenchman.

He is throttling the liberty my father gave his life to win ''!!

John was quietly insistent.

`` There can be no compromise when souls are in jeopardy ''.

A week later the sentence of the Council was carried out: Jake Camaret and the woman were marched naked through the streets past a mocking populace.

Before them stalked the beadle, proclaiming as he went, `` Thus the Council deals with those who break its laws -- adulterers, thieves, murderers, and lewd persons.

Let evildoers contemplate their ways, and let every man beware ''!!

John's thoughts raced painfully into the past as he read the letter he had just received from his sister Mary.

Charles had died two weeks before, in early November, without being reconciled to the Church.

The canons, in a body, had tried to force him on his deathbed to let them give him the last rites of the Church, but he had died still proclaiming salvation by faith.

Burial had taken place at night in the ground at the public crossroads under the gibbet, so that his enemies could not find his body and have it dug up and burned.

The Abbot of St. Eloi, Claude De Mommor, had been a good friend, but not even he thought Charles deserved burial in hallowed ground.

John closed his eyes and saw once again the little niche in his mother's bedroom, where she had knelt to tell the good Virgin of her needs.

The blue-draped Virgin was still there, but no one knelt before her now.

Not even Varnessa;;

she, too, prayed only to God.

For an instant John longed for the sound of the bells of Noyon-la-Sainte, the touch of his mother's hand, the lilt of Charles's voice in the square raftered rooms, his father's bass tones rumbling to the canons, and the sight of the beloved bishop.

But he had to follow the light.

Unless God expected a man to believe the Holy Scriptures, why had He given them to him??

The white-clad trees stood like specters in the February night.

Snow buried the streets and covered the slanting rooftops, as John trudged toward St. Peter's.

A carriage crunched by, its dim lights filtering through the gloom.

The sharp wind slapped at him and his feet felt like ice as the snow penetrated the holes of his shoes, his only ones, now patched with folded parchment.

The city had recently given him a small salary, but it was not enough to supply even necessities.

As he neared the square, a round figure muffled in a long, black cape whisked by.

John recognized Ablard Corne and called out a greeting.

How grateful he was to such men!!

There were several on the Council who tried to live like Christians.

Despite their efforts, the problems seemed to grow graver all the time.

Quickening his steps, John entered the vast church and climbed the tower steps to the bells.

Underneath the big one, in the silent moonlight, lay a dead pigeon, and on the smaller bell, the Clemence, two gray and white birds slept huddled together in the cold winter air.

John leaned upon the stone balustrade.

He brushed back his black hair, shoving it under his pastor's cap to keep it from blowing in his eyes.

Below the moon-splashed world rolled away to insurmountable white peaks;;

above him the deep blue sky glittered with stars.

He stood very still, his arms at his sides, staring up at the heavens, then down at the blinking lights below.

`` How long, my Lord??

How long??

I have never asked for an easy task, but I am weary of the strife ''.

Sleep was difficult these days.

Indigestion plagued him.

Severe headaches were frequent.

Loneliness tore through him like a physical pain whenever he thought of Peter Robert, Nerien, Nicholas Cop, Martin Bucer, and even the compromising Louis Du Tillet.

An occasional traveler from Italy brought news of Peter Robert, who was now distributing his Bible among the Waldensian peasants.

Letters came regularly from Nerien, Nicholas, and Martin.

He had Anthony and William to confide in and consult.

But William continued to find a bitter joy in smashing images and tearing down symbols sacred to the Old Church.

John found it difficult, but he held him in check.

And Anthony was busy most of the time courting this girl and that.

His easy good looks made him a favorite with the ladies.

Geneva, instead of becoming the City of God, as John had dreamed, had in the two years since he had been there, continued to be a godless place where all manner of vice flourished.

Refugees poured in, signing the Confession and rules in order to remain, and then disregarding them.

Dice rolled, prostitutes plied their trade, thieves stole, murderers stabbed, and the ungodly blasphemed.

Catholics who were truly Christians longed for the simple penance of days gone by.

Libertines recalled the heroism of the past and demanded: `` Are we going to allow the Protestant Pope, Master Calvin, to curtail our liberty??

Why, oh why, doesn't he stick to preaching the Gospel, instead of meddling in civic affairs, politics, economics, and social issues that are no concern of the Church ''??

And John's reply was always the same: `` Anything that affects souls is the concern of the Church!!

We will have righteousness ''!!

Tears burned behind his eyes as he prayed and meditated tonight.

Unless the confusion cleared, he would not be coming here much longer.

Monsieur Favre's threat would become a reality, for he continued to proclaim loudly that the city must rid itself of `` that Frenchman ''.

The slow tapping of a cane on the stone steps coming up to the tower interrupted his reverie.

Faint at first, the tapping grew until it sounded loud against the wind.

Eli Corault!!

John thought.

What is he doing here at this hour??

He started down the steps to meet the near-blind preacher, who had been one of the early Gospelers in Paris.

`` John??

Is that you??

I came to warn you of a plot ''!!

John stood above him, his face ashen.

What now??

Slowly, like a man grown old, he took Eli's hand and led him below to the tower study, guiding him to a chair beside the little hearth where a fire still burned.

`` Plot ''??

John asked tiredly.

`` Monsieur Favre just paid me a visit.

I went to your rooms, and Anthony told me you were here.

Two Anabaptists, Caroli and Benoit, are to challenge you and William to a debate before the Council.

It is to be a trap.

You know the law: if you lose the debate after accepting a challenge, you will be banished ''!!

`` What will be the subject ''??

`` You are to be accused of Arianism to confuse the religious who remain loyal ''.

Anger and fear fused in John.

Ever since the fourth century a controversy had raged over the person of Christ.

Those who refused to believe that He was the eternal Son of God were termed Arianists.

Peter Caroli had come to Geneva, saying that he had been a bishop of the Church of Rome and had been persecuted in Paris for his Reformed faith.

He asked to be appointed a preacher.

But Michael Sept had unmasked him, revealing he had never been a bishop, but was an Anabaptist, afraid to state his faith, because he knew John Calvin had written a book against their belief that the soul slept after death.

So John had refused to agree to his appointment as a preacher, and now Caroli sought revenge.

John sighed.

`` If William agrees, we should insist on a public debate '', he said at length.

`` There is more to the conspiracy.

Bern demands that the Lord's Supper be administered here as it used to be, with unleavened bread.

Furthermore, Bern decrees that we must do as we are ordered by the Council, preach only the word of God and stop meddling in politics ''!!

`` It was always the spirit with Christ;;

matters such as leavened or unleavened bread are inconsequential.

Geneva must remain a sovereign state.

We will not yield to the demands of Bern ''!!

The firelight played over Eli's flowing white locks and rugged features.

`` Monsieur Favre indicated that if I would co-operate, after you and William are banished, following the debate, I will be given a place of influence ''.

`` What was your reply to that ''??

`` That I would rather be banished with two such Christians than be made the Chief Syndic ''!!

The following morning, as John entered the Place Molard on his way to visit a sick refugee, he had a premonition of danger.

Then suddenly a group of men and dogs circled him.

He wanted to run, but he knew that if he did, he would be lost.

He stood very still, his heart thumping wildly.

On the outskirts of the rabble the Camaret brothers and Gaspard Favre shook their fists.

`` Are you going to comply with the demands of Bern ''??

The chinless Jake called.

`` Arianist ''!!

A rowdy with a big blob of a nose roared.

`` Heretic ''!!

John lifted his hand for silence.

`` Know this: the ministers will not yield to the demands of Bern ''.

His voice shook a little.

Somebody heaved a stone.

For an instant John was stunned.

When he felt the side of his head, his fingers came away covered with blood.

Before he could duck, another stone struck him.

And another.

`` Let him be now ''!!

Pierre Ameaux, the gaming-card manufacturer said, his little pig eyes glaring.

`` We have taught him a lesson ''.

The crowd moved back and John started dizzily down the hill.

Fists pummeled him as he staggered forward.

Then he slipped and went down on his hands and knees in the melting snow.

At once a bevy of dogs was snapping and snarling around him.

One, more horrible than the rest, lunged, growling deep in his throat, his hair bristling.

With great difficulty John clambered to his feet and started to run, sweat pouring down his face.

Standing in the shelter of the tent -- a rejected hospital tent on which the rain now dripped, no longer drumming -- Adam watched his own hands touch the objects on the improvised counter of boards laid across two beer barrels.

There was, of course, no real need to rearrange everything.

A quarter inch this way or that for the hardbake, or the toffee, or the barley sugar, or the sardines, or the bitters, or the condensed milk, or the stationery, or the needles -- what could it mean??

Adam watched his own hands make the caressing, anxious movement that, when rain falls and nobody comes, and ruin draws close like a cat rubbing against the ankles, has been the ritual of stall vendors, forever.

He recognized the gesture.

He knew its meaning.

He had seen a dry, old, yellowing hand reach out, with that painful solicitude, to touch, to rearrange, to shift aimlessly, some object worth a pfennig.

Back in Bavaria he had seen that gesture, and at that sight his heart had always died within him.

On such occasions he had not had the courage to look at the face above the hand, whatever face it might be.

Now the face was his own.

He wondered what expression, as he made that gesture, was on his face.

He wondered if it wore the old anxiety, or the old, taut stoicism.

But there was no need, he remembered, for his hand to reach out, for his face to show concern or stoicism.

It was nothing to him if rain fell and nobody came.

Then why was he assuming the role -- the gesture and the suffering??

What was he expiating??

Or was he now taking the role -- the gesture and the suffering -- because it was the only way to affirm his history and identity in the torpid, befogged loneliness of this land.

This was Virginia.

He looked out of the tent at the company street.

The rain dripped on the freezing loblolly of the street.

Beyond that misty gray of the rain, he saw the stretching hutment, low diminutive log cabins, chinked with mud, with doorways a man would have to crouch to get through, with roofs of tenting laid over boughs or boards from hardtack boxes, or fence rails, with cranky chimneys of sticks and dried mud.

The chimney of the hut across from him was surmounted by a beef barrel with ends knocked out.

In this heavy air, however, that device did not seem to help.

The smoke from that chimney rose as sluggishly as smoke from any other, and hung as sadly in the drizzle, creeping back down along the sopping canvas of the roof.

Over the door was a board with large, inept lettering: home sweet home.

This was the hut of Simms Purdew, the hero.

The men were huddled in those lairs.

Adam knew the names of some.

He knew the faces of all, hairy or shaven, old or young, fat or thin, suffering or hardened, sad or gay, good or bad.

When they stood about his tent, chaffing each other, exchanging their obscenities, cursing command or weather, he had studied their faces.

He had had the need to understand what life lurked behind the mask of flesh, behind the oath, the banter, the sadness.

Once covertly looking at Simms Purdew, the only man in the world whom he hated, he had seen the heavy, slack, bestubbled jaw open and close to emit the cruel, obscene banter, and had seen the pale-blue eyes go watery with whisky and merriment, and suddenly he was not seeing the face of that vile creature.

He was seeing, somehow, the face of a young boy, the boy Simms Purdew must once have been, a boy with sorrel hair, and blue eyes dancing with gaiety, and the boy mouth grinning trustfully among the freckles.

In that moment of vision Adam heard the voice within himself saying: I must not hate him, I must not hate him or I shall die.

His heart suddenly opened to joy.

He thought that if once, only once, he could talk with Simms Purdew, something about his own life, and all life, would be clear and simple.

If Simms Purdew would turn to him and say: `` Adam, you know when I was a boy, it was a funny thing happened.

Lemme tell you now '' --

If only Simms Purdew could do that, whatever the thing he remembered and told.

It would be a sign for the untellable, and he, Adam, would understand.

Now, Adam, in the gray light of afternoon, stared across at the hut opposite his tent, and thought of Simms Purdew lying in there in the gloom, snoring on his bunk, with the fumes of whisky choking the air.

He saw the sign above the door of the hut: home sweet home.

He saw the figure of a man in a poncho coming up the company street, with an armful of wood.

It was Pullen James, the campmate of Simms Purdew.

He carried the wood, carried the water, did the cooking, cleaning and mending, and occasionally got a kick in the butt for his pains.

Adam watched the moisture flow from the poncho.

It gave the rubberized fabric a dull gleam, like metal.

Pullen James humbly lowered his head, pushed aside the hardtack-box door of the hut, and was gone from sight.

Adam stared at the door and remembered that Simms Purdew had been awarded the Medal of Honor for gallantry at Antietam.

The street was again empty.

The drizzle was slacking off now, but the light was grayer.

With enormous interest, Adam watched his hands as they touched and shifted the objects on the board directly before him.

Into the emptiness of the street, and his spirit, moved a form.

The form was swathed in an army blanket, much patched, fastened at the neck with a cord.

From under the shapeless huddle of blanket the feet moved in the mud.

The feet wore army shoes, in obvious disrepair.

The head was wrapped in a turban and on top of the turban rode a great hamper across which a piece of poncho had been flung.

The gray face stared straight ahead in the drizzle.

Moisture ran down the cheeks, gathered at the tip of the nose, and at the chin.

The figure was close enough now for him to see the nose twitching to dislodge the drop clinging there.

The figure stopped and one hand was perilously freed from the hamper to scratch the nose.

Then the figure moved on.

This was one of the Irish women who had built their own huts down near the river.

They did washing.

Adam recognized this one.

He recognized her because she was the one who, in a winter twilight, on the edge of camp, had once stopped him and reached down her hand to touch his fly.

`` Slice o' mutton, bhoy ''??

She had queried in her soft guttural.

`` Slice o' mutton ''??

Her name was Mollie.

They called her Mollie the Mutton, and laughed.

Looking down the street after her, Adam saw that she had again stopped and again removed one hand from the basket.

He could not make out, but he knew that again she was scratching her nose.

Mollie the Mutton was scratching her nose.

The words ran crazily in his head: Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose in the rain.

Then the words fell into a pattern: `` Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose, Scratching her nose in the rain.

Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose in the rain ''.

The pattern would not stop.

It came again and again.

He felt trapped in that pattern, in the repetition.

Suddenly he thought he might weep.

`` What's the matter with me ''??

He demanded out loud.

He looked wildly around, at the now empty street, at the mud, at the rain.

`` Oh, what's the matter with me ''??

He demanded.

When he had stored his stock in the great oak chest, locked the two big hasps and secured the additional chain, tied the fly of the tent, and picked up the cash box, he moved up the darkening street.

He would consign the cash box into the hands of Jed Hawksworth, then stand by while his employer checked the contents and the list of items sold.

Then he --

Then what??

He did not know.

His mind closed on that prospect, as though fog had descended to blot out a valley.

Far off, in the dusk, he heard voices singing, muffled but strong.

In one of the huts a group of men were huddled together, singing.

He stopped.

He strained to hear.

He heard the words: `` Rock of Ages, cleft for me, Let me hide myself in Thee!!

Let the water and the blood From Thy riven side flow!!

''

He thought: I am a Jew from Bavaria.

He was standing there, he thought, in Virginia, in the thickening dusk, in a costly greatcoat that had belonged to another Jew.

That other Jew, a young man too, had left that greatcoat behind, in a rich house, and marched away.

He had crossed the river which now, beyond the woods yonder, was sliding darkly under the mist.

He had plunged into the dark woods beyond.

He had died there.

What had that man, that other young Jew, felt as he stood in the twilight and heard other men, far away, singing together??

Adam thought of the hutments, regiment after regiment, row after row, the thousands of huts, stretching away into the night.

He thought of the men, the nameless thousands, huddling in them.

He thought of Simms Purdew snoring on his bunk while Pullen James crouched by the hearth, skirmishing an undershirt for lice, and a wet log sizzled.

He thought of Simms Purdew, who once had risen at the edge of a cornfield, a maniacal scream on his lips, and swung a clubbed musket like a flail to beat down the swirl of Rebel bayonets about him.

He thought of Simms Purdew rising up, fearless in glory.

He felt the sweetness of pity flood through him, veining his very flesh.

Those men, lying in the huts, they did not know.

They did not know who they were or know their own worth.

In the pity for them his loneliness was gone.

Then he thought of Aaron Blaustein standing in his rich house saying: `` God is tired of taking the blame.

He is going to let History take the blame for a while ''.

He thought of the old man laughing under the glitter of the great chandelier.

He thought: Only in my heart can I make the world hang together.

Adam rose from the crouch necessary to enter the hut.

He saw Mose squatting by the hearth, breaking up hardtack into a pan.

A pot was boiling on the coals.

`` Gonna give Ole Buckra all his money ''??

Mose asked softly.

Adam nodded.

`` Yeah '', Mose murmured, `` yeah.

And look what he done give us ''.

Adam looked at the pot.

`` What is it ''??

He asked.

`` Chicken '', Mose said, and theatrically licked his lips.

`` Gre't big fat chicken, yeah ''.

He licked his lips again.

Then: `` yeah.

A chicken with six tits and a tail lak a corkscrew.

And it squealed for slop ''.

Mose giggled.

`` Fooled you, huh??

It is the same ole same, tell me its name.

It is sowbelly with tits on.

It is salt po'k.

It is salt po'k and skippers.

That po'k, it was so full of skippers it would jump and run and not come when you say, hoo-pig.

Had to put my foot on it to hole it down while I cut it up fer the lob-scuse ''.

He dumped the pan of crumbled hardtack into the boiling pot of lobscouse.

`` Good ole lob-scuse '', he mumbled, and stirred the pot.

He stopped stirring and looked over his shoulder.

`` Know what Ole Buckra et tonight ''??

He demanded.

`` Know what I had to fix fer Ole Him ''??

Adam shook his head.

`` Chicken '', Mose said.

She was a child too much a part of her environment, too eager to grow and learn and experience.

Once, they were at Easthampton for the summer( again, Fritzie said, a good place, even though they were being robbed).

One soft evening -- that marvelous sea-blessed time when the sun's departing warmth lingers and a smell of spume and wrack haunts everything -- Amy had picked herself off the floor and begun to walk.

Fritzie was on the couch reading;;

Laura was sitting in an easy chair about eight feet away.

The infant, in white terry-cloth bathrobe, her face intense and purposeful, had essayed a few wobbly steps toward her father.

`` Y'all wanna walk -- walk '', he said.

Then, gently, he shoved her behind toward Laura.

Amy walked -- making it halfway across the cottage floor.

She lost not a second, picking herself up and continuing her pilgrimage to Laura.

Then Laura took her gently and shoved her off again, toward Fritzie: Amy did not laugh -- this was work, concentration, achievement.

In a few minutes she was making the ten-foot hike unaided;;

soon she was parading around the house, flaunting her new skill.

Some liar's logic, a wisp of optimism as fragile as the scent of tropical blossoms that came through the window( a euphoria perhaps engendered by the pill Fritzie had given her), consoled her for a moment.

Amy had to be safe, had to come back to them -- if only to reap that share of life's experiences that were her due, if only to give her parents another chance to do better by her.

Through the swathings of terror, she jabbed deceit's sharp point -- Amy would be reborn, a new child, with new parents, living under new circumstances.

The comfort was short-lived, yet she found herself returning to the assurance whenever her imagination forced images on her too awful to contemplate without the prop of illusion.

Gazing at her husband's drugged body, his chest rising and falling in mindless rhythms, she saw the grandeur of his fictional world, that lush garden from which he plucked flowers and herbs.

She envied him.

She admired him.

In the darkness, she saw him stirring.

He seemed to be muttering, his voice surprisingly clear.

`` Y'all should have let me take that money out '', Andrus said.

`` 'nother minute I'd have been fine.

H'all should have let me do it ''.

Laura touched his hand.

`` Yes, I know, Fritzie.

I should have ''.

Tuesday

The heat intensified on Tuesday.

Southern California gasped and blinked under an autumn hot spell, drier, more enervating, more laden with man's contrived impurities than the worst days of the summer past.

It could continue this way, hitting 106 and more in the Valley, Joe McFeeley knew, into October.

He and Irvin Moll were sipping coffee at the breakfast bar.

Both had been up since 7:00 -- Irv on the early-morning watch, McFeeley unable to sleep during his four-hour relief.

The night before, they had telephoned the Andrus maid, Selena Masters, and she had arrived early, bursting her vigorous presence into the silent house with an assurance that amused McFeeley and confounded Moll.

The latter, thanking her for the coffee, had winked and muttered, `` Sure 'nuff, honey ''.

Selena was the wrong woman for these crudities.

With a hard eye, she informed Moll: `` Don't sure 'nuff me, officer.

I'm honey only to my husband, understand ''??

Sergeant Moll understood.

The maid was very black and very energetic, trim in a yellow pique uniform.

Her speech was barren of southernisms;;

she was one of Eliot Sparling's neutralized minorities, adopting the rolling R's and constricted vowels of Los Angeles.

Not seeing her dark intelligent face, one would have gauged the voice as that of a Westwood Village matron, ten years out of Iowa.

After she had served the detectives coffee and toast( they politely declined eggs, uncomfortable about their tenancy), she settled down with a morning newspaper and began reading the stock market quotations.

While she was thus engaged, McFeeley questioned her about her whereabouts the previous day, any recollections she had of people hanging around, of overcurious delivery boys or repairmen, of strange cars cruising the neighborhood.

She answered him precisely, missing not a beat in her scrutiny of the financial reports.

Selena Masters, Joe realized, was her own woman.

She was the only kind of Negro Laura Andrus would want around: independent, unservile, probably charging double what ordinary maids did for housework -- and doubly efficient.

When the parents emerged from the bedroom a few minutes later, the maid greeted them quietly.

`` I'm awful sorry about what's happened '', Selena said.

`` Maybe today'll be a good-news day ''.

She charged off to the bedrooms.

Moll took his coffee into the nursery.

During the night, a phone company technician had deadened the bells and installed red blinkers on the phones.

Someone would have to remain in the office continually.

McFeeley greeted the parents, then studied his notebook.

He wanted to take the mother to headquarters at once and start her on the mug file.

`` Sleep well ''??

He asked.

Andrus did not answer him.

His face was bloated with drugging, redder than normal.

The woman had the glassy look of an invalid, as if she had not slept at all.

`` Oh -- we managed '', she said.

`` I'm a little groggy.

Did anything happen during the night ''??

`` Few crank calls '', McFeeley said.

`` A couple of tips we're running down -- nothing promising.

We can expect more of the same.

Too bad your number is in the directory ''.

`` Didn't occur to me my child would be kidnaped when I had it listed '', Andrus muttered.

He settled on the sofa with his coffee, warming his hands on the cup, although the room was heavy with heat.

The three had little to say to each other.

The previous night's horror -- the absolute failure, overcast with the intrusions of the press, had left them all with a wan sense of uselessness, of play-acting.

Sipping their coffee, discussing the weather, the day's shopping, Fritzie's commitments at the network( all of which he would cancel), they avoided the radio, the morning TV news show, even the front page of the Santa Luisa Register, resting on the kitchen bar.

Kidnaper spurns ransom;;

Amy still missing.

Once, Andrus walked by it, hastily scanned the bold black headline and the five-column lead of the article( by Duane Bosch, staff correspondent -- age not given), and muttered: `` We a buncha national celebrities ''.

McFeeley told the parents he would escort them to police headquarters in a half hour.

Before that, he wanted to talk to the neighbors.

He did not want to bring the Andruses to the station house too early -- Rheinholdt had summoned a press conference, and he didn't want them subjected to the reporters again.

He could think of nothing else to tell them: no assurances, no hopeful hints at great discoveries that day.

When the detective left, Andrus phoned his secretary to cancel his work and to advise the network to get a substitute director for his current project.

Mrs. Andrus was talking to the maid, arranging for her to come in every day, instead of the four days she now worked.

Outside, only a handful of reporters remained.

The bulk of the press corps was covering Rheinholdt's conference.

In contrast to the caravan of the previous night, there were only four cars parked across the street.

Two men he did not recognize were sipping coffee and munching sweet rolls.

He did not see Sparling, or DeGroot, or Ringel, or any of the feverish crew that had so harassed him twelve hours ago.

However, the litter remained, augmented by several dozen lunchroom suppers.

The street cleaner had not yet been around.

One of the reporters called to him: `` Anything new, Lieutenant ''??

And he ignored him, skirting the parked cars and walking up the path to the Skopas house.

When McFeeley was halfway to the door, the proprietor emerged -- a mountainous, dark man, his head thick with resiny black hair, his eyes like two of the black olives he imported in boatloads.

McFeeley identified himself.

The master of the house, his nourished face unrevealing, consented to postpone his departure a few minutes to talk to the detective.

Inside, as soon as Mr. Skopas had disclosed -- in a hoarse whisper -- the detective's errand, his family gathered in a huddle, forming a mass of dark flesh on and around a brocaded sofa which stood at one side of a baroque fireplace.

Flanked by marble urns and alabaster lamps, they seemed to be posing for a tribal portrait.

It was amazing how they had herded together for protection: an enormous matriarch in a quilted silk wrapper, rising from the breakfast table;;

a gross boy in his teens, shuffling in from the kitchen with a sandwich in his hands;;

a girl in her twenties, fat and sullen, descending the marble staircase;;

then all four gathering on the sofa to face the inquisitor.

They answered him in monosyllables, nods, occasionally muttering in Greek to one another, awaiting the word from Papa, who restlessly cracked his knuckles, anxious to stuff himself into his white Cadillac and burst off to the freeway.

No, they hadn't seen anyone around;;

no, they didn't know the Andrus family;;

yes, they had read about the case;;

yes, they had let some reporters use their phone, but they would no longer.

They offered no opinions, volunteered nothing, betrayed no emotions.

Studying them, McFeeley could not help make comparison with the Andrus couple.

The Skopas people seemed to him of that breed of human beings whose insularity frees them from tragedy.

He imagined they were the kind whose tax returns were never examined( if they were, they were never penalized), whose children had no unhappy romances, whose names never knew scandal.

The equation was simple: wealth brought them happiness, and their united front to the world was their warning that they meant to keep everything they had, let no one in on the secrets.

By comparison, Fritzie and Laura Andrus were quivering fledglings.

They possessed no outer fortifications, no hard shells of confidence;;

they had enough difficulty getting from day to day, let alone having an awful crime thrust upon them.

Skopas expressed no curiosity over the case, offered no expression of sympathy, made no move to escort McFeely to the door.

All four remained impacted on the sofa until he had left.

He had spoken to Mrs..

Emerson the previous day.

There remained a family named Kahler, owners of a two-story Tudor-style house on the south side of the Andrus home.

Their names had not come up in any discussions with Laura, and he had no idea what they would be like.

McFeeley noted the immaculate lawn and gardens: each blade of grass cropped, bright and firm;;

each shrub glazed with good health.

The door was answered by a slender man in his sixties -- straight-backed, somewhat clerical in manner, wearing rimless glasses.

When Joe identified himself, he nodded, unsmiling, and ushered him into a sedate living room.

Mrs. Kahler joined them.

She had a dried-out quality -- a gray, lean woman, not unattractive.

Both were dressed rather formally.

The man wore a vest and a tie, the woman had on a dark green dress and three strands of pearls.

`` Funny thing '', Mr. Kahler said, when they were seated, `` when I heard you ringing, I figured it was that guy down the block, Hausman ''.

McFeeley looked puzzled.

Kahler continued: `` I fixed his dog the other day and I guess he's sore, so I expected him to come barging in ''.

Mr. Kahler went on to explain how Hausman's fox terrier had been `` making '' in his flower beds.

The dog refused to be scared off, so Kahler had purchased some small firecrackers.

He would lay in wait in the garage, and when the terrier came scratching around, he'd let fly with a cherry bomb.

`` Scared the hell out of him '', Kahler grinned.

`` I hit him in the ass once ''.

Both grinned at the detective.

`` Finally, all I needed was to throw a little piece of red wood that looked like a firecracker and that dumb dog would run ki-yi-ing for his life ''.

In the dim underwater light they dressed and straightened up the room, and then they went across the hall to the kitchen.

She was intimidated by the stove.

He found the pilot light and turned on one of the burners for her.

The gas flamed up two inches high.

They found the teakettle.

And put water on to boil and then searched through the icebox.

Several sections of a loaf of dark bread;;

butter;;

jam;;

a tiny cake of ice.

In their search for what turned out to be the right breakfast china but the wrong table silver, they opened every cupboard door in the kitchen and pantry.

While she was settling the teacart, he went back across the hall to their bedroom, opened one of the suitcases, and took out powdered coffee and sugar.

She appeared with the teacart and he opened the windows.

`` Do you want to call Eugene ''??

He didn't, but it was not really a question, and so he left the room, walked down the hall to the front of the apartment, hesitated, and then knocked lightly on the closed door of the study.

A sleepy voice answered.

`` Le petit dejeuner '', Harold said, in an accent that did credit to Miss Sloan, his high-school French teacher.

At the same time, his voice betrayed uncertainty about their being here, and conveyed an appeal to whatever is reasonable, peace-loving, and dependable in everybody.

Since ordinary breakfast-table conversation was impossible, it was at least something that they were able to offer Eugene the sugar bowl with their sugar in it, and the plate of bread and butter, and that Eugene could return the pitcher of hot milk to them handle first.

Eugene put a spoonful of powdered coffee into his cup and then filled it with hot water.

Stirring, he said: `` I am sorry that my work prevents me from doing anything with you today ''.

They assured him that they did not expect or need to be entertained.

Harold put a teaspoonful of powdered coffee in his cup and filled it with hot water, and then, stirring, he sat back in his chair.

The chair creaked.

Every time he moved or said something, the chair creaked again.

Eugene was not entirely silent, or openly rude -- unless asking Harold to move to another chair and placing himself in the fauteuil that creaked so alarmingly was an act of rudeness.

It went right on creaking under his own considerable weight, and all it needed, Harold thought, was for somebody to fling himself back in a fit of laughter and that would be the end of it.

Through the open window they heard sounds below in the street: cartwheels, a tired horse's plodding step, voices.

Harold indicated the photograph on the wall and asked what church the stone sculpture was in.

Eugene told him and he promptly forgot.

They passed the marmalade, the bread, the black-market butter, back and forth.

Nothing was said about hotels or train journeys.

Eugene offered Harold his car, to use at any time he cared to, and when this offer was not accepted, the armchair creaked.

They all three had another cup of coffee.

Eugene was in his pajamas and dressing gown, and on his large feet he wore yellow Turkish slippers that turned up at the toes.

`` Excuse me '', he said in Berlitz English, and got up and left them, to bathe and dress.

The first shrill ring of the telephone brought Harold out into the hall.

He realized that he had no idea where the telephone was.

At that moment the bathroom door flew open and Eugene came out, with his face lathered for shaving, and strode down the hall, tying the sash of his dressing gown as he went.

The telephone was in the study but the ringing came from the hall.

Between the telephone and the wall plug there was sixty feet of cord, and when the conversation came to an end, Eugene carried the instrument with him the whole length of the apartment, to his bathroom, where it rang three more times while he was shaving and in the tub.

Before he left the apartment he knocked on their door and asked if there was anything he could do for them.

Harold shook his head.

`` Sabine called a few minutes ago '', Eugene said.

`` She wants you and Barbara to have dinner with her tomorrow night ''.

He handed Harold a key to the front door, and cautioned him against leaving it unlocked while they were out of the apartment.

When enough time had elapsed so that there was little likelihood of his returning for something he had forgotten, Harold went out into the hall and stood looking into one room after another.

In the room next to theirs was a huge cradle, of mahogany, ornately carved and decorated with gold leaf.

It was the most important-looking cradle he had ever seen.

Then came their bathroom, and then a bedroom that, judging by the photographs on the walls, must belong to Mme Cestre.

A young woman who looked like Alix, with her two children.

Alix and Eugene on their wedding day.

Matching photographs in oval frames of Mme Bonenfant and an elderly man who must be Alix's grandfather.

Mme Vienot, considerably younger and very different.

The schoolboy.

And a gray-haired man whose glance -- direct, lifelike, and mildly accusing -- was contradicted by the gilt and black frame.

It was the kind of frame that is only put around the photograph of a dead person.

Professor Cestre, could it be??

With the metal shutters closed, the dining room was so dark that it seemed still night in there.

One of the drawing-room shutters was partly open and he made out the shapes of chairs and sofas, which seemed to be upholstered in brown or russet velvet.

The curtains were of the same material, and there were some big oil paintings -- portraits in the style of Lancret and Boucher.

Though, taken individually, the big rooms were, or seemed to be, square, the apartment as a whole formed a triangle.

The apex, the study where Eugene slept, was light and bright and airy and cheerful.

The window looked out on the Place Redoute -- it was the only window of the apartment that did.

Looking around slowly, he saw a marble fireplace, a desk, a low bookcase of mahogany with criss-crossed brass wire instead of glass panes in the doors.

The daybed Eugene had slept in, made up now with its dark-brown velours cover and pillows.

The portable record player with a pile of classical records beside it.

Beethoven's Fifth was the one on top.

Da-da-da-dum Music could not be Eugene's passion.

Besides, the records were dusty.

He tried the doors of the bookcase.

Locked.

The titles he could read easily through the criss-crossed wires: works on theology, astral physics, history, biology, political science.

No poetry.

No novels.

He moved over to the desk and stood looking at the papers on it but not touching anything.

The clock on the mantel piece was scandalized and ticked so loudly that he glanced at it over his shoulder and then quickly left the room.

The concierge called out to them as they were passing through the foyer.

Her quarters were on the right as you walked into the building, and her small front room was clogged with heavy furniture -- a big, round, oak dining table and chairs, a buffet, with a row of unclaimed letters inserted between the mirror and its frame.

The suitcases had come while they were out, and had been put in their room, the concierge said.

He waited until they were inside the elevator and then said: `` Now what do we do ''??

`` Call the Vouillemont, I guess ''.

`` I guess ''.

Rather than sit around waiting for the suitcases to be delivered, they had gone sight-seeing.

They went to the Flea Market, expecting to find the treasures of Europe, and found instead a duplication of that long double row of booths in Tours.

Cheap clothing and junk of every sort, as far as the eye could see.

They looked, even so.

Looked at everything.

Barbara bought some cotton aprons, and Harold bought shoestrings.

They had lunch at a sidewalk cafe overlooking the intersection of two broad, busy, unpicturesque streets, and coming home they got lost in the Metro;;

it took them over an hour to get back to the station where they should have changed, in order to take the line that went to the Place Redoute.

It was the end of the afternoon when he took the huge key out of his pocket and inserted it into the keyhole.

When he opened the door, there stood Eugene, on his way out of the apartment.

He was wearing sneakers and shorts and an open-collared shirt, and in his hand he carried a little black bag.

He did not explain where he was going, and they did not ask.

Instead, they went on down the hall to their room.

`` Do you think he could be having an affair ''??

Barbara asked, as they heard the front door close.

`` Oh no '', Harold said, shocked.

`` Well, this is France, after all ''.

`` I know, but there must be some other explanation.

He's probably spending the evening with friends ''.

`` And for that he needs a little bag ''??

They went shopping in the neighborhood, and bought two loaves of bread with the ration coupons they had been given in Blois, and some cheese, and a dozen eggs, and a bag of oranges from a peddler in the Place Redoute -- the first oranges they had seen since they landed.

They had Vermouth, sitting in front of a cafe.

When they got home Harold was grateful for the stillness in the apartment, and thought how, under different circumstances, they might have stayed on here, in these old-fashioned, high-ceilinged rooms that reminded him of the Irelands' apartment in the East Eighties.

They could have been perfectly happy here for ten whole days.

He went down the hall to Eugene's bathroom, to turn on the hot-water heater, and on the side of the tub he saw a pair of blue wool swimming trunks.

He felt them.

They were damp.

He reached out and felt the bath towel hanging on the towel rack over the tub.

Damp also.

He looked around the room and then called out: `` Come here, quick ''??

`` What is it ''??

Barbara asked, standing in the doorway.

`` I've solved the mystery of the little bag.

There it is and there is what was in it.

But where do people go swimming in Paris??

That boat in the river, maybe ''.

`` What boat ''??

`` There's a big boat anchored near the Place De La Concorde, with a swimming pool in it -- didn't you notice it??

But if he has time to go swimming, he had time to be with us ''.

She looked at him in surprise.

`` I know '', he said, reading her mind.

`` I don't know what I'm going to do with you ''.

`` It's because we are in France '', he said, `` and know so few people.

So something like this matters more than it would at home.

Also, he was so nice when he was nice ''.

`` All because I didn't feel like dancing ''.

`` I don't think it was that, really ''.

`` Then what was it ''??

`` I don't know.

I wish I did.

The tweed coat, maybe.

The thing about Eugene is that he's very proud ''.

And the thing about hurt feelings, the wet bathing suit pointed out, is that the person who has them is not quite the innocent party he believes himself to be.

For instance -- what about all those people Harold Rhodes went toward unhesitatingly, as if this were the one moment they would ever have together, their one chance of knowing each other??

Fortunately, the embarrassing questions raised by objects do not need to be answered, or we would all have to go sleep in the open fields.

And in any case, answers may clarify but they do not change anything.

He brought with him a mixture of myrrh and aloes, of about a hundred pounds' weight.

They took Jesus's body, then, and wrapped it in winding-clothes with the spices;;

that is how the Jews prepare a body for burial.

Listed as present at the Descent were Mary, Mary's sister, Mary Magdalene, John, Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus.

Search as he might, he could find no place where the Bible spoke of a moment when Mary could have been alone with Jesus.

Mostly the scene was crowded with mourners, such as the dramatic Dell'Arca Lamentation in Bologna, where the grief-stricken spectators had usurped Mary's last poignant moment.

In his concept there could be no one else present.

His first desire was to create a mother and son alone in the universe.

When might Mary have had that moment to hold her child on her lap??

Perhaps after the soldiers had laid him on the ground, while Joseph of Arimathea was at Pontius Pilate's asking for Christ's body, Nicodemus was gathering his mixture of myrrh and aloes, and the others had gone home to mourn.

Those who saw his finished Pieta would take the place of the biblical witnesses.

They would feel what Mary was undergoing.

There would be no halos, no angels.

These would be two human beings, whom God had chosen.

He felt close to Mary, having spent so long concentrating on the beginning of her journey.

Now she was intensely alive, anguished;;

her son was dead.

Even though he would later be resurrected, he was at this moment dead indeed, the expression on his face reflecting what he had gone through on the cross.

In his sculpture therefore it would not be possible for him to project anything of what Jesus felt for his mother;;

only what Mary felt for her son.

Jesus' inert body would be passive, his eyes closed.

Mary would have to carry the human communication.

This seemed right to him.

It was a relief to shift in his mind to technical problems.

Since his Christ was to be life size, how was Mary to hold him on her lap without the relationship seeming ungainly??

His Mary would be slender of limb and delicate of proportion, yet she must hold this full-grown man as securely and convincingly as she would a child.

There was only one way to accomplish this: by design, by drawing diagrams and sketches in which he probed the remotest corner of his mind for creative ideas to carry his concept.

He started by making free sketches to loosen up his thinking so that images would appear on paper.

Visually, these approximated what he was feeling within himself.

At the same time he started walking the streets, peering at the people passing or shopping at the stalls, storing up fresh impressions of what they looked like, how they moved.

In particular he sought the gentle, sweet-faced nuns, with head coverings and veils coming to the middle of their foreheads, remembering their expressions until he reached home and set them down on paper.

Discovering that draperies could be designed to serve structural purposes, he began a study of the anatomy of folds.

He improvised as he went along, completing a life-size clay figure, then bought yards of an inexpensive material from a draper, wet the lightweight cloth in a basin and covered it over with clay that Argiento brought from the bank of the Tiber, to the consistency of thick mud.

No fold could be accidental, each turn of the drapery had to serve organically, to cover the Madonna's slender legs and feet so that they would give substantive support to Christ's body, to intensify her inner turmoil.

When the cloth dried and stiffened, he saw what adjustments had to be made.

`` So that's sculpture '', commented Argiento wryly, when he had sluiced down the floor for a week, `` making mud pies ''.

Michelangelo grinned.

`` See, Argiento, if you control the way these folds are bunched, like this, or made to flow, you can enrich the body attitudes.

They can have as much tactile appeal as flesh and bone ''.

He went into the Jewish quarter, wanting to draw Hebraic faces so that he could reach a visual understanding of how Christ might have looked.

The Jewish section was in Trastevere, near the Tiber at the church of San Francesco a Ripa.

The colony had been small until the Spanish Inquisition of 1492 drove many Jews into Rome.

Here, for the most part, they were well treated, as a `` reminder of the Old Testament heritage of Christianity '';;

many of their gifted members were prominent in the Vatican as physicians, musicians, bankers.

The men did not object to his sketching them while they went about their work, but no one could be persuaded to come to his studio to pose.

He was told to ask for Rabbi Melzi at the synagogue on Saturday afternoon.

Michelangelo found the rabbi in the room of study, a gentle old man with a white beard and luminous grey eyes, robed in black gabardine with a skullcap on his head.

He was reading from the Talmud with a group of men from his congregation.

When Michelangelo explained why he had come, Rabbi Melzi replied gravely:

`` The Bible forbids us to bow down to or to make graven images.

That is why our creative people give their time to literature, not to painting or sculpture ''.

`` But, Rabbi Melzi, you don't object to others creating works of art ''??

`` Not at all.

Each religion has its own tenets ''.

`` I am carving a Pieta from white Carrara marble.

I wish to make Jesus an authentic Jew.

I cannot accomplish this if you will not help me ''.

The rabbi said thoughtfully, `` I would not want my people to get in trouble with the Church ''.

`` I am working for the Cardinal of San Dionigi.

I'm sure he would approve ''.

`` What kind of models would you prefer ''??

`` Workmen.

In their mid-thirties.

Not bulky laborers, but sinewy men.

With intelligence.

And sensitivity ''.

Rabbi Melzi smiled at him with infinitely old but merry eyes.

`` Leave me your address.

I will send you the best the quarter has to offer ''.

Michelangelo hurried to Sangallo's solitary bachelor room with his sketches, asked the architect to design a stand which would simulate the seated Madonna.

Sangallo studied the drawings and improvised a trestle couch.

Michelangelo bought some scrap lumber.

Together he and Argiento built the stand, covering it with blankets.

His first model arrived at dusk.

He hesitated for a moment when Michelangelo asked him to disrobe, so Michelangelo gave him a piece of toweling to wrap around his loins, led him to the kitchen to take off his clothes.

He then draped him over the rough stand, explained that he was supposed to be recently dead, and was being held on his mother's lap.

The model quite plainly thought Michelangelo crazy;;

only the instructions from his rabbi kept him from bolting.

But at the end of the sitting, when Michelangelo showed him the quick, free drawings, with the mother roughed in, holding her son, the model grasped what Michelangelo was after, and promised to speak to his friends.

He worked for two hours a day with each model sent by the rabbi.

Mary presented quite a different problem.

Though this sculpture must take place thirty-three years after her moment of decision, he could not conceive of her as a woman in her mid-fifties, old, wrinkled, broken in body and face by labor or worry.

His image of the Virgin had always been that of a young woman, even as had his memory of his mother.

Jacopo Galli introduced him into several Roman homes.

Here he sketched, sitting in their flowing gowns of linen and silk, young girls not yet twenty, some about to be married, some married a year or two.

Since the Santo Spirito hospital had taken only men, he had had no experience in the study of female anatomy;;

but he had sketched the women of Tuscany in their fields and homes.

He was able to discern the body lines of the Roman women under their robes.

He spent concentrated weeks putting his two figures together: a Mary who would be young and sensitive, yet strong enough to hold her son on her lap;;

and a Jesus who, though lean, was strong even in death a look he remembered well from his experience in the dead room of Santo Spirito.

He drew toward the composite design from his meticulously accurate memory, without need to consult his sketches.

Soon he was ready to go into a three-dimensional figure in clay.

Here he would have free expression because the material could be moved to distort forms.

When he wanted to emphasize, or get greater intensity, he added or subtracted clay.

Next he turned to wax because there was a similarity of wax to marble in tactile quality and translucence.

He respected each of these approach techniques, and kept them in character: his quill drawings had a scratchiness, suggesting skin texture;;

the clay he used plastically to suggest soft moving flesh, as in an abdomen, in a reclining torso;;

the wax he smoothed over to give the body surface an elastic pull.

Yet he never allowed these models to become fixed in his mind;;

they remained rough starting points.

When carving he was charged with spontaneous energy;;

too careful or detailed studies in clay and wax would have glued him down to a mere enlarging of his model.

The true surge had to be inside the marble itself.

Drawing and models were his thinking.

Carving was action.

10.

The arrangement with Argiento was working well, except that sometimes Michelangelo could not figure who was master and who apprentice.

Argiento had been trained so rigorously by the Jesuits that Michelangelo was unable to change his habits: up before dawn to scrub the floors, whether they were dirty or not;;

water boiling on the fire for washing laundry every day, the pots scoured with river sand after each meal.

`` Argiento, this is senseless '', he complained, not liking to work on the wet floors, particularly in cold weather.

`` You're too clean.

Scrub the studio once a week.

That's enough ''.

`` No '', said Argiento stolidly.

`` Every day.

Before dawn.

I was taught ''.

`` And God help anyone who tries to unteach you ''!!

Grumbled Michelangelo;;

yet he knew that he had nothing to grumble about, for Argiento made few demands on him.

The boy was becoming acquainted with the contadini families that brought produce into Rome.

On Sundays he would walk miles into the campagna to visit with them, and in particular to see their horses.

The one thing he missed from his farm in the Po Valley was the animals;;

frequently he would take his leave of Michelangelo by announcing:

`` Today I go see the horses ''.

It took a piece of bad luck to show Michelangelo that the boy was devoted to him.

He was crouched over his anvil in the courtyard getting his chisels into trim, when a splinter of steel flew into his eye and imbedded itself in his pupil.

He stumbled into the house, eyes burning like fire.

Argiento made him lie down on the bed, brought a pan of hot water, dipped some clean white linen cloth and applied it to extract the splinter.

Though the pain was considerable Michelangelo was not too concerned.

He assumed he could blink the splinter out.

But it would not come.

Argiento never left his side, keeping the water boiled, applying hot compresses throughout the night.

By the second day Michelangelo began to worry;;

and by the second night he was in a state of panic: he could see nothing out of the afflicted eye.

At dawn Argiento went to Jacopo Galli.

Galli arrived with his family surgeon, Maestro Lippi.

The surgeon carried a cage of live pigeons.

He told Argiento to take a bird out of the cage, cut a large vein under its wing, let the blood gush into Michelangelo's injured eye.

The surgeon came back at dusk, cut the vein of a second pigeon, again washed out the eye.

Beth was very still and her breath came in small jerking gasps.

The thin legs twitched convulsively once, then Kate felt the little body stiffening in her arms and heard one strangled sound.

The scant flesh grew cool beneath her frantic hands.

The child was gone.

When Juanita awoke, Kate was still rocking the dead child, still crooning in disbelief, `` No, no, oh, no!!

''

They put Kate to bed and wired Jonathan and sent for the young Presbyterian minister.

He sat beside Kate's bed with the others throughout the morning, talking, talking of God's will, while Kate lay staring angrily at him.

When he told her God had called the child to Him, she rejected his words rebelliously.

Few of the neighbors came, but Mrs. Tussle came, called by tragedy.

`` It always comes in threes '', she sighed heavily.

`` Trouble never comes but in threes ''.

They held the funeral the next morning from the crossroads church and buried the little box in the quiet family plot.

Kate moved through all the preparations and services in a state of bewilderment.

She would not accept the death of such a little child.

`` God called her to Him '', the minister had said.

God would not do that, Kate thought stubbornly.

Jonathan's letter came, as she knew it would, and he had accepted their child's death as another judgment from God against both Kate and himself.

In blind panic of grief she accepted Jonathan's dictum, and believed in her desperation that she had been cursed by God.

She held Jonathan's letter, his words burning like a brand, and knew suddenly that the bonds between them were severed.

She had nothing left but her duty to his land and his son.

Joel came and sat mutely with her, sharing her pain and anguish, averting his eyes from the ice packs on her bosom.

Juanita and Mrs. Tussle kept Kate in bed a week until her milk dried.

When she returned to life in the big house she felt shriveled of all emotion save dedication to duty.

She disciplined herself daily to do what must be done.

She had even steeled herself to keep Juanita upstairs in the nurse's room off the empty nursery, although the girl tried to insist on moving back to the quarters to spare Kate remembrance of the baby's death.

Juanita drooped about the place, wearing a haunted, brooding look, which Kate attributed to the baby's death, until the day a letter came for her addressed to `` Miss Juanita Fitzroy '', bearing a Grafton postmark.

Seeing the slanting hand, Kate knew uneasily that it was from the Yankee colonel.

The Federal forces had taken Parkersburg and Grafton from the Rebels and were moving to take all the mountains.

Kate tried to contain her curiosity and foreboding at what the letter portended, at what involvement existed for Juanita.

Uncle Randolph and Joel had replanted the bottom lands with difficulty, for more of the slaves, including Annie, had sneaked off when the soldiers broke camp.

Joel worked like a field hand in the afternoons after school.

He had been at lessons in the schoolhouse since they returned from Harpers Ferry.

Kate felt she had deserted the boy in her own loss.

She loved him and missed his company.

Uncle Randolph had been riding out every evening on some secret business of his own.

What it was Kate could not fathom.

He claimed to be visiting the waterfront saloon at the crossroads to play cards and drink with his cronies, but Kate had not smelled brandy on him since Mrs. Lattimer's funeral.

Joel knew what he was about, however.

`` You're gonna get caught '', she heard Joel say to Uncle Randolph by the pump one morning.

`` Not this old fox '', chuckled Uncle Randolph.

`` Everybody knows I'm just a harmless, deaf old man who takes to drink.

I aim to keep a little whisky still back in the ridge for my pleasure ''.

`` Whiskey still, my foot '', said Joel.

`` You're back there riding with the guerrillas, the Moccasin Rangers ''.

`` Hush '', said Uncle Randolph, smiling, `` or I'll give you another black eye ''.

He patted the eye Joel had had blackened in a fight over being Rebel at the crossroads some days back.

Kate had no idea what they were talking of, although she had seen the blue lights and strange fires burning and winking on the ridges at night, had heard horsemen on the River Road and hill trails through the nights till dawn.

Stranger, Uncle Randolph began riding home nights with a jug strapped to his saddle, drunkenly singing `` Old Dan Tucker '' at the top of his voice.

Hearing his voice ring raucously up from the road, Kate would await him anxiously and watch perplexed as he walked into the house, cold sober.

What he was about became clear to her with the circulation of another broadside proclamation by General McClellan, threatening reprisals against Rebel guerrillas.

She was taken up in worry for the reckless old man.

Kate drew more and more on her affection for Joel through the hot days of summer work.

She had taken him out of the schoolhouse and closed the school for the summer, after she saw Miss Snow crack Joel across the face with a ruler for letting a snake loose in the schoolroom.

Kate had walked past the school on her morning chores and had seen the whole incident, had seen Joel's burning humiliation before Miss Snow's cold, bespectacled wrath.

He had the hardest pains of growing before him now, as he approached twelve.

These would be his hardest years, she knew, and he missed his father desperately.

She tried to find some way to draw him out, to help him.

Whenever she found time, she went blackberry picking with him, and they would come home together, mouths purple, arms and faces scratched, tired enough to forget grief for another day.

He tended the new colts Beau had sired.

He helped Kate and Juanita enlarge the flower garden in the side yard, where they sometimes sat in the still evenings watching the last fat bees working against the summer's purple dusk.

No one went much to the crossroads now except Uncle Randolph.

They stayed in their own world on the bluff, waiting for letters and the peddler, bringing the news.

Jonathan wrote grimly of the destruction of Harpers Ferry before they abandoned it;;

of their first engagement at Falling Waters after Old Jack's First Brigade had destroyed all the rolling stock of the B& O Railroad.

The men were restive, he wrote, ready to take the battle to the enemy as Jackson wished.

The peddler came bawling his wares and told them of the convention in Wheeling, Which had formed a new state government by declaring the government at Richmond in the east illegal because they were traitors.

Dangling his gaudy trinkets before them, he told of the Rebel losses in the mountains, at Cheat and Rich mountains both, and the Federal march on Beverly.

`` Cleaned all them Rebs out'n the hills, they did!!

They won't never git over inter loyal western Virginia, them traitors!!

The Federals is making everybody take the oath of loyalty around these parts too '', he crowed.

After he had gone, Kate asked Uncle Randolph proudly, `` Would you take their oath ''??

And the old man had given a sly and wicked laugh and said, `` Hell, yes!!

I think I've taken it about fifty times already ''!!

Winking at Joel's look of shock.

Her mother wrote Kate of her grief at the death of Kate's baby and at Jonathan's decision to go with the South `` And, dear Kate '', she wrote, `` poor Dr. Breckenridge's son Robert is now organizing a militia company to go South, to his good father's sorrow.

Maj. Anderson of Fort Sumter is home and recruiting volunteers for the U.S. Army.

In spite of the fact that the state legislature voted us neutral, John Hunt Morgan is openly flying the Confederate flag over his woolen factory ''!!

Rumor of a big battle spread like a grassfire up the valley.

Accounts were garbled at the telegraph office when they sent old George down to Parkersburg for the news.

`` All dey know down dere is it were at Manassas Junction and it were a big fight '', the old man told them.

In the next few days they had cause to rejoice.

It had been a big battle, and the Confederate forces had won.

Jonathan and Ben were not on the lists of the dead or on that of the missing.

Kate and Mrs. Tussle waited for letters anxiously.

Joel went to the crest of a hill behind the house and lit an enormous victory bonfire to celebrate.

When Kate hurried in alarm to tell him to put it out, she saw other dots of flames among the western Virginia hills from the few scattered fires of the faithful.

They all prayed now that the North would realize that peace must come, for Virginia had defended her land victoriously.

The week after Manassas the sound of horses in the yard brought Kate up in shock from an afternoon's rest when she saw the Federal soldiers from her upstairs window.

They had already lost most of their corn, she thought.

Were they to be insulted again because of the South's great victory??

She remembered McClellan's last proclamation as she hurried fearfully down the stairs.

At the landing she saw Juanita, her face flushed pink with excitement, run down the hall from the kitchen to the front door.

Juanita stopped just inside the open door, her hand to her mouth.

As Kate came swiftly down the stairs to the hall she saw Colonel Marsh framed in the doorway, his face set in the same vulnerable look Juanita wore.

Kate greeted him gravely, uneasy with misgivings at his visit.

`` What brings you here again, Colonel Marsh ''??

She asked, taking him and Juanita into the parlor where the shutters were closed against the afternoon sun.

`` I stopped to say goodbye, Mrs. Lattimer, and to tell you how sorry I was to hear about your baby.

I wish our doctor could have saved her ''.

`` It was a terrible loss to me '', said Kate quietly, feeling the pain twist again at the mention, knowing now that Juanita must have written to him at Grafton.

`` Where will you go now that you're leaving Parkersburg ''??

She asked him, seeing Juanita's eyes grow bleak.

`` As you know, General McClellan has been occupying Beverly.

He has notified me that he has orders to go to Washington to take over the Army of the Potomac.

I am to go to Washington to serve with him ''.

`` When are you to leave ''??

Kate asked, watching them both now anxiously.

Their eyes betrayed too much of their emotions, she thought sadly.

`` Tomorrow.

Would you permit Juanita to walk about the grounds with me for a short spell, Mrs. Lattimer ''??

`` Stay here in the parlor where it's cool '', she said, trying to be calm.

It would be better for Joel and Uncle Randolph and Mrs. Tussle not to see them.

Kate went back and reminded the kitchen women of the supper preparations.

Then she took iced lemonade to Marsh's young aide where he sat in the cool of the big trees around the flower garden.

When Marsh called to his aide and the pair rode off down the River Road where the gentians burned blue, Juanita was shaken and trying not to cry.

She sought Kate out upstairs, her lips trembling.

`` He wants me to go with him tomorrow '', she told Kate.

`` What do you want to do ''??

Kate asked, uneasy at the gravity of the girl's dilemma.

`` I could go with him.

He knows me as your niece, which, of course, I am.

But I am a slave!!

You own me.

It's your decision '', said Juanita, holding her face very still, trying to contain the bitterness of her voice as she enunciated her words too distinctly.

`` No, the decision is yours.

I have held your papers of manumission since I married Mr. Lattimer ''.

The red glow from the cove had died out of the sky.

The two in the bed knew each other as old people know the partners with whom they have shared the same bed for many years, and they needed to say no more.

The things left unsaid they both felt deeply, and with a sigh they fell back on the well-stuffed pillows.

Anita put out the remaining candles with a long snuffer, and in the smell of scented candlewick, the comforting awareness of each other's bodies, the retained pattern of dancers and guests remembered, their minds grew numb and then empty of images.

They slept -- Mynheer with a marvelously high-pitched snoring, the damn seahorse ivory teeth watching him from a bedside table.

In the ballroom below, the dark had given way to moonlight coming in through the bank of French windows.

It was a delayed moon, but now the sky had cleared of scudding black and the stars sugared the silver-gray sky.

Martha Schuyler, old, slow, careful of foot, came down the great staircase, dressed in her best lace-drawn black silk, her jeweled shoe buckles held forward.

`` Well, I'm here at last '', she said, addressing the old portraits on the walls.

`` I don't hear the music.

I am getting deaf, I must admit it ''.

She came to the ballroom and stood on the two carpeted steps that led down to it.

`` Where is everyone??

I say, where is everyone??

Peter, you lummox, you've forgot to order the musicians ''.

She stood there, a large old woman, smiling at the things she would say to him in the morning, this big foolish baby of a son.

There were times now, like this, when she lost control of the time count and moved freely back and forth into three generations.

Was it a birthday ball??

When Peter had reached his majority at eighteen??

Or was it her own first ball as mistress of this big house, a Van Rensselaer bride from way upstate near Albany, from Rensselaerwyck.

And this handsome booby, staring and sweating, was he her bridegroom??

Martha picked up the hem of her gown and with eyes closed she slowly began to dance a stately minuet around the ballroom.

David Cortlandt was tired beyond almost the limits of his flesh.

He had ridden hard from Boston, and he was not used to horseback.

Now, driving the horse and sulky borrowed from Mynheer Schuyler, he felt as if every bone was topped by burning oil and that every muscle was ready to dissolve into jelly and leave his big body helpless and unable to move.

The road leading south along the river was shaded with old trees, and in the moonlight the silvery landscape was like a setting for trolls and wood gods rather than the Hudson River Valley of his boyhood memories.

He slapped the reins on the back of the powerful gray horse and held on as the sulky's wheels hit a pothole and came out with a jolt and went on.

He would cross to Manhattan, to Harlem Heights, before morning.

There a certain farmhouse was a station for the Sons of Liberty.

He would send on by trusted messenger the dispatches with their electrifying news.

And he would sleep, sleep, and never think of roads and horses' sore haunches, of colonial wars.

Strange how everything here fitted back into his life, even if he had been away so long.

Mynheer, Sir Francis, the valley society, the very smell of the river on his right purling along to the bay past fish weirs and rocks, and ahead the sleepy ribbon of moon-drenched road.

A mist was walking on the water, white as cotton, but with a blending and merging grace.

Ahead there was a stirring of sudden movement at a crossroads.

David reached for the pair of pistols in the saddlebags at his feet.

He pulled out one of them and cocked it.

A strange wood creature came floating up from a patch of berry bushes.

It was a grotesque hen, five or six feet tall.

It had the features of a man bewhiskered by clumps of loose feathers.

It ran, this apocalyptic beast, on two thin legs, and its wings -- were they feathered arms??

-- flapped as it ran.

Its groin was bloody.

Black strips of skin hung from it.

The horse shied at the dreadful thing and flared its nostrils.

David took a firm hand with it.

The creature in feathers looked around and David saw the mad eyes, glazed with an insane fear.

The ungainly bird thing ran away, and to David its croaking sounded like the crowing of a tormented rooster.

Then it was gone.

He drove on, wary and shaken.

The Sons were out tonight.

Chapter 10

New York lay bleaching in the summer sun, and the morning fish hawk, flying in the heated air, saw below him the long triangular wedge of Manhattan Island.

It was thickly settled by fifteen thousand citizens and laid out into pig-infested streets, mostly around the Battery, going bravely north to Wall Street, but giving up and becoming fields and farms in the region of Harlem Heights.

From there it looked across at Westchester County and the Hudson River where the manor houses, estates, and big farms of the original( non-Indian) landowners began.

On the east side of the island of Manhattan the indifferent hawk knew the East River that connected New York Bay with Long Island Sound.

On the western tip of Long Island protruded Brooklyn Heights.

It commanded a view over Manhattan and the harbor.

A fringe of housing and gardens bearded the top of the heights, and behind it were sandy roads leading past farms and hayfields.

Husbandry was bounded by snake-rail fences, and there were grazing cattle.

On the shores north and south, the fishers and mooncursers -- smugglers -- lived along the churning Great South Bay and the narrow barrier of sand, Fire Island.

The morning hawk, hungry for any eatable, killable, digestible item, kept his eyes on the ring of anchored ships that lay off the shores in the bay, sheltered by the Jersey inlets.

They often threw tidbits overboard.

The larger ships were near Paulus Hook, already being called, by a few, Jersey City.

These were the ships of His Majesty's Navy, herding the hulks of the East Indies merchants and the yachts and ketches of the loyalists.

The news of battle on Breed's Hill had already seeped through, and New York itself was now left in the hands of the local Provincial Congress.

The fish hawk, his wings not moving, circled and glided lower.

The gilt sterns of the men-of-war becoming clearer to him, the sides of the wooden sea walls alternately painted yellow and black, the bronze cannon at the ports.

The captain's gig of H.M.S. Mercury was being rowed to H.M.S. Neptune.

On shore `` the freed slaves to despotism '' -- the town dwellers -- watched the ships and waited.

The chevaux de frise, those sharp stakes and barriers around the fort at the Battery, pointed to a conflict between the town and sea power rolling in glassy swells as the tide came in.

Across the bay the Palisades were heavy in green timber;;

their rock paths led down to the Hudson.

Below in the open bay facing Manhattan was Staten Island, gritty with clam shells and mud flats behind which nested farms, cattle barns, and berry thickets.

Along Wappinger Creek in Dutchess County, past the white church at Fishkill, past Verplanck's Point on the east bank of the Hudson, to the white salt-crusted roads of the Long Island Rockaways there was a watching and an activity of preparing for something explosive to happen.

Today, tomorrow, six months, even perhaps a year

The fish hawk flew on and was lost from sight.

The British ships rolled at anchor, sent out picket boats and waited for orders from London.

Waited for more ships, more lobster-backed infantry, and asked what was to be done with a war of rebellion??

David Cortlandt, having slept away a day and a night, came awake in a plank farmhouse on the Harlem River near Spuyten Duyvil.

He looked out through windowpanes turned a faint violet by sun and weather, looked out at King's Bridge toward Westchester.

The road seemed animated with a few more wagons than usual;;

a carriage raising up the choking June dust, and beyond, in a meadow, a local militia company drilling with muskets, Kentuck' rifles, every kind of horse pistol, old sword, or cutlass.

The wraith-like events of the last few days flooded David's mind and he rubbed his unshaved chin and felt again the ache in his kidneys caused by his saddle odyssey from Boston.

Pensive, introspective, he ached.

He had sent the dispatches downtown to the proper people and had slept.

Now there was more to do.

Orders not written down had to be transmitted to the local provincial government.

He scratched his mosquito-plagued neck.

From the saddlebags, hung on a Hitchcock chair, David took out a good English razor, a present from John Hunter.

He found tepid water in a pitcher and a last bit of soap, and he lathered his face and stood stropping the razor on his broad leather belt, its buckle held firm by a knob of the bedpost.

He hoped he was free of self-deception.

Here he was, suddenly caught up in the delirium of a war, in the spite and calumny of Whigs and Tories.

There would be great need soon for his skill as surgeon, but somehow he had not planned to use his knowledge merely for war.

David Cortlandt had certain psychic intuitions that this rebellion was not wholly what it appeared on the surface.

He knew that many were using it for their own ends.

But it did not matter.

He stropped the razor slowly;;

what mattered was that a new concept of Americans was being born.

That some men did not want it he could understand.

The moral aridity of merchants made them loyal usually to their ledgers.

Yet some, like Morris Manderscheid, would bankrupt themselves for the new ideas.

Unique circumstances would test us all, he decided.

Injury and ingratitude would occur.

No doubt John Hancock would do well now;;

war was a smugglers' heaven.

And what of that poor tarred and feathered wretch he had seen on the road driving down from Schuyler's??

Things like that would increase rather than be done away with.

One had to believe in final events or one was stranded in the abyss of nothing.

He saw with John Hunter now that the perfectability of man was a dream.

Life was a short play of tenebrous shadows.

David began to shave with great sweeping strokes.

Time plays an essential part in our mortality, and suddenly for no reason he could imagine( or admit) the image of Peg laughing filled his mind -- so desirable, so lusty, so full of nuances of pleasure and joy.

He drove sensual patterns off, carefully shaving his long upper lip.

It is harder, he muttered, to meditate on man( or woman) than on God.

David finished shaving, washed his face clean of lather, and combed and retied his hair.

He was proud that he had never worn a wig.

More and more of the colonials were wearing their own hair and not using powder.

He felt cheerful again, refreshed;;

presentable in his wide-cut brown suit, the well-made riding boots.

It is so easy to falsify sentiment.

In the meadow below, militia officers shouted at their men and on King's Bridge two boys sat fishing.

The future would happen;;

he did not have to hurry it by thinking too much.

A man could be tossed outside the dimension of time by a stray bullet these days.

He began to pack the saddlebags.

And all this too shall pass away: it came to him out of some dim corner of memory from a church service when he was a boy -- yes, in a white church with a thin spur steeple in the patriarchal Hudson Valley, where a feeling of plenitude was normal in those English-Dutch manors with their well-fed squires.

Burly leathered men and wrinkled women in drab black rags carried on in a primitive way, almost unchanged from feudal times.

Peasants puzzled Andrei.

He wondered how they could go on in poverty, superstition, ignorance, with a complete lack of desire to make either their land or their lives flourish.

Andrei remembered a Bathyran meeting long ago.

Tolek Alterman had returned from the colonies in Palestine and, before the national leadership, exalted the miracles of drying up swamps and irrigating the desert.

A fund-raising drive to buy tractors and machinery was launched.

Andrei remembered that his own reaction had been one of indifference.

Had he found the meaning too late??

It aggravated him.

The land of the Lublin Uplands was rich, but no one seemed to care.

In the unfertile land in Palestine humans broke their backs pushing will power to the brink.

He had sat beside Alexander Brandel at the rostrum of a congress of Zionists.

All of them were there in this loosely knit association of diversified ideologies, and each berated the other and beat his breast for his own approaches.

When Alexander Brandel rose to speak, the hall became silent.

`` I do not care if your beliefs take you along a path of religion or a path of labor or a path of activism.

We are here because all our paths travel a blind course through a thick forest, seeking human dignity.

Beyond the forest all our paths merge into a single great highway which ends in the barren, eroded hills of Judea.

This is our singular goal.

How we travel through the forest is for each man's conscience.

Where we end our journey is always the same.

We all seek the same thing through different ways -- an end to this long night of two thousand years of darkness and unspeakable abuses which will continue to plague us until the Star of David flies over Zion ''.

This was how Alexander Brandel expressed pure Zionism.

It had sounded good to Andrei, but he did not believe it.

In his heart he had no desire to go to Palestine.

He loathed the idea of drying up swamps or the chills of malaria or of leaving his natural birthright.

Before he went into battle Andrei had told Alex, `` I only want to be a Pole.

Warsaw is my city, not Tel Aviv ''.

And now Andrei sat on a train on the way to Lublin and wondered if he was not being punished for his lack of belief.

Warsaw!!

He saw the smug eyes of the Home Army chief, Roman, and all the Romans and the faces of the peasants who held only hatred for him.

They had let this black hole of death in Warsaw's heart exist without a cry of protest.

Once there had been big glittering rooms where Ulanys bowed and kissed the ladies' hands as they flirted from behind their fans.

Warsaw!!

Warsaw!!

`` Miss Rak.

I am a Jew ''.

Day by day, week by week, month by month, the betrayal gnawed at Andrei's heart.

He ground his teeth together.

I hate Warsaw, he said to himself.

I hate Poland and all the goddamned mothers' sons of them.

All of Poland is a coffin.

The terrible vision of the ghetto streets flooded his mind.

What matters now??

What is beyond this fog??

Only Palestine, and I will never live to see Palestine because I did not believe.

By late afternoon the train inched into the marshaling yards in the railhead at Lublin, which was filled with lines of cars poised to pour the tools of war to the Russian front.

At a siding, another train which was a familiar sight these days.

Deportees.

Jews.

Andrei's skilled eye sized them up.

They were not Poles.

He guessed by their appearance that they were Rumanians.

He walked toward the center of the city to keep his rendezvous with Styka.

Of all the places in Poland, Andrei hated Lublin the most.

The Bathyrans were all gone.

Few of the native Jews who had lived in Lublin were still in the ghetto.

From the moment of the occupation Lublin became a focal point.

He and Ana watched it carefully.

Lublin generally was the forerunner of what would happen elsewhere.

Early in 1939, Odilo Globocnik, the Gauleiter of Vienna, established SS headquarters for all of Poland.

The Bathyrans ran a check on Globocnik and had only to conclude that he was in a tug of war with Hans Frank and the civilian administrators.

Globocnik built the Death's-Head Corps.

Lublin was the seed of action for the `` final solution '' of the Jewish problem.

As the messages from Himmler, Heydrich, and Eichmann came in through Alfred Funk, Lublin's fountainhead spouted.

A bevy of interlacing lagers, work camps, concentration camps erupted in the area.

Sixty thousand Jewish prisoners of war disappeared into Lublin's web.

Plans went in and out of Lublin, indicating German confusion.

A tale of a massive reservation in the Uplands to hold several million Jews A tale of a plan to ship all Jews to the island of Madagascar Stories of the depravity of the guards at Globocnik's camps struck a chord of terror at the mere mention of their names.

Lipowa 7, Sobibor, Chelmno, Poltawa, Belzec, Krzywy-Rog, Budzyn, Krasnik.

Ice baths, electric shocks, lashings, wild dogs, testicle crushers.

The Death's-Head Corps took in Ukrainian and Baltic Auxiliaries, and the Einsatzkommandos waded knee-deep in blood and turned into drunken, dope-ridden maniacs.

Lublin was their heart.

In the spring of 1942 Operation Reinhard began in Lublin.

The ghetto, a miniature of Warsaw's, was emptied into the camp in the Majdan-Tartarski suburb called Majdanek.

As the camp emptied, it was refilled by a draining of the camps and towns around Lublin, then by deportees from outside Poland.

In and in and in they poured through the gates of Majdanek, but they never left, and Majdanek was not growing any larger.

What was happening in Majdanek??

Was Operation Reinhard the same pattern for the daily trains now leaving the Umschlagplatz in Warsaw??

Was there another Majdanek in the Warsaw area, as they suspected??

Andrei stopped at Litowski Place and looked around quickly at the boundary of civil buildings.

His watch told him he was still early.

Down the boulevard he could see a portion of the ghetto wall.

He found an empty bench, opened a newspaper, and stretched his legs before him.

Krakow Boulevard was filled with black Nazi uniforms and the dirty brownish ones of their Auxiliaries.

`` Captain Androfski ''!!

Andrei glanced up over the top of the paper and looked into the mustached, homely face of Sergeant Styka.

Styka sat beside him and pumped his hand excitedly.

`` I have been waiting across the street at the post office since dawn.

I thought you might get in on a morning train ''.

`` It's good to see you again, Styka ''.

Styka studied his captain.

He almost broke into tears.

To him, Andrei Androfski had always been the living symbol of a Polish officer.

His captain was thin and haggard and his beautiful boots were worn and shabby.

`` Remember to call me Jan '', Andrei said.

Styka nodded and sniffed and blew his nose vociferously.

`` When that woman found me and told me that you needed me I was never so happy since before the war ''.

`` I'm lucky that you were still living in Lublin ''.

Styka grumbled about fate.

`` For a time I thought of trying to reach the Free Polish Forces, but one thing led to another.

I got a girl in trouble and we had to get married.

Not a bad girl.

So we have three children and responsibilities.

I work at the granary.

Nothing like the old days in the army, but I get by.

Who complains??

Many times I tried to reach you, but I never knew how.

I came to Warsaw twice, but there was that damned ghetto wall ''

`` I understand ''.

Styka blew his nose again.

`` Were you able to make the arrangements ''??

Andrei asked.

`` There is a man named Grabski who is the foreman in charge of the bricklayers at Majdanek.

I did exactly as instructed.

I told him you are on orders from the Home Army to get inside Majdanek so you can make a report to the government in exile in London ''.

`` His answer ''??

`` Ten thousand zlotys ''.

`` Can he be trusted ''??

`` He is aware he will not live for twenty-four hours if he betrays you ''.

`` Good man, Styka ''.

`` Captain Jan must you go inside Majdanek??

The stories Everyone really knows what is happening there ''.

`` Not everyone, Styka ''.

`` What good will it really do ''??

`` I don't know.

Perhaps perhaps there is a shred of conscience left in the human race.

Perhaps if they know the story there will be a massive cry of indignation ''.

`` Do you really believe that, Jan ''??

`` I have to believe it ''.

Styka shook his head slowly.

`` I am only a simple soldier.

I cannot think things out too well.

Until I was transferred into the Seventh Ulanys I was like every other Pole in my feeling about Jews.

I hated you when I first came in.

But my captain might have been a Jew, but he wasn't a Jew.

What I mean is, he was a Pole and the greatest soldier in the Ulanys.

Hell, sir.

The men of our company had a dozen fights defending your name.

You never knew about it, but by God, we taught them respect for Captain Androfski ''.

Andrei smiled.

`` Since the war I have seen the way the Germans have behaved and I think, Holy Mother, we have behaved like this for hundreds of years.

Why ''??

`` How can you tell an insane man to reason or a blind man to see ''??

`` But we are neither blind nor insane.

The men of your company would not allow your name dishonored.

Why do we let the Germans do this ''??

`` I have sat many hours with this, Styka.

All I ever wanted was to be a free man in my own country.

I've lost faith, Styka.

I used to love this country and believe that someday we'd win our battle for equality.

But now I think I hate it very much ''.

`` And do you really think that the world outside Poland will care any more than we do ''??

The question frightened Andrei.

`` Please don't go inside Majdanek ''.

`` I'm still a soldier in a very small way, Styka ''.

It was an answer that Styka understood.

Grabski's shanty was beyond the bridge over the River Bystrzyca near the rail center.

Grabski sat in a sweat-saturated undershirt, cursing the excessive heat which clamped an uneasy stillness before sundown.

He was a square brick of a man with a moon-round face and sunken Polish features.

Flies swarmed around the bowl of lentils in which he mopped thick black bread.

Half of it dripped down his chin.

He washed it down with beer and produced a deep-seated belch.

`` Well ''??

Andrei demanded.

Grabski looked at the pair of them.

He grunted a sort of `` yes '' answer.

`` My cousin works at the Labor Bureau.

He can make you work papers.

It will take a few days.

I will get you inside the guard camp as a member of my crew.

I don't know if I can get you into the inner camp.

Maybe yes, maybe no, but you can observe everything from the roof of a barrack we are building ''.

Grabski slurped his way to the bottom of the soup bowl.

`` Can't understand why the hell anyone wants to go inside that son-of-a-bitch place ''.

`` Orders from the Home Army ''.

`` Why??

Nothing there but Jews ''.

Andrei shrugged.

`` We get strange orders ''.

`` Well -- what about the money ''??

Andrei peeled off five one-thousand-zloty notes.

Grabski had never seen so much money.

His broad flat fingers, petrified into massive sausages by years of bricklaying, snatched the bills clumsily.

`` This ain't enough ''.

`` You get the rest when I'm safely out of Majdanek ''.

`` I ain't taking no goddamned chances for no Jew business ''.

Andrei and Styka were silent.

She was getting real dramatic.

I'd have been more impressed if I hadn't remembered that she'd played Hedda Gabler in her highschool dramatics course.

I didn't want her back on that broken record.

`` Nothing's free in the whole goddam world '', was all I could think of to say.

When I'd delivered myself of that gem there was nothing to do but order up another drink.

`` I am '', she said.

I'd forgotten all about Thelma and the Kentucky Derby and how it was Thelma's fifty dollars I was spending.

It was just me and Eileen getting drunk together like we used to in the old days, and me staring at her across the table crazy to get my hands on her partly because I wanted to wring her neck because she was so ornery but mostly because she was so wonderful to touch.

Drunk or sober she was the most attractive woman in the world for me.

I was crazy about her all over again.

It was the call of the wild all right.

That evening turned out to be hell like all the others.

We moved down Broadway from ginmill to ginmill.

It was the same old routine.

Eileen got to dancing, just a little tiny dancing step to a hummed tune that you could hardly notice, and trying to pick up strange men, but each time I was ready to say to hell with it and walk out she'd pull herself together and talk so understandingly in that sweet husky voice about the good times and the happiness we'd had together and there I was back on the hook.

I did have the decency to call up Thelma and tell her I'd met old friends and would be home late.

`` I could scratch her eyes out '', Eileen cried and stamped her foot when I came back from the phone booth.

`` You know I don't like my men to have other women.

I hate it.

I hate it ''.

She got so drunk I had to take her home.

It was a walk up on Hudson Street.

She just about made me carry her upstairs and then she clung to me and wouldn't let me go.

There was a man's jacket on the chair and a straw hat on the table.

The place smelt of some kind of hair lotion these pimplike characters use.

`` What about Ballestre ''??

I had to shake her to make her listen.

`` Precious.

What about him ''??

Suddenly she was very mysterious and dramatic.

`` Precious and I allow each other absolute freedom.

We are above being jealous.

He's used to me bringing home strange men.

I'll just tell him you're my husband.

He can't object to that ''.

`` Well I object.

If he pokes his nose in here I'll slug him ''.

`` That really would be funny ''.

She began to laugh.

She was still laughing when I grabbed her and started rolling her on the bed.

After all I'm made of flesh and blood.

I'm not a plaster saint.

Waking up was horrible.

Never in my life have I felt so remorseful about anything I've done as I did about spending that night with my own wife.

We both had hangovers.

Eileen declared she couldn't lift her head from the pillow.

She lay under the covers making jabbing motions with her forefinger telling me where to look for the coffeepot.

I was stumbling in my undershirt trying to find my way around her damn kitchenette when I smelt that sickish sweet hairtonic smell.

There was somebody else in the apartment.

I stiffened.

Honest I could feel the hair stand up on the back of my neck like a dog's that is going to get into a fight.

I turned around with the percolator in my hand.

My eyes were so bleary I could barely see him but there he was, a little smooth olivefaced guy in a new spring overcoat and a taffycolored fedora.

Brown eyes, eyebrow mustache.

Oval face without an expression in the world.

We didn't have time to speak before Eileen's voice was screeching at us from the bed.

`` Joseph Maria Ballestre meet Francis Xavier Bowman.

Exboyfriend meet exhusband ''.

She gave the nastiest laugh I ever heard.

`` And don't either of you forget that I'm not any man's property.

If you want to fight, go down on the sidewalk ''.

She was enjoying the situation.

Imagine that.

Eileen was a psychologist all right.

Instead of wanting to sock the poor bastard I found myself having a fellowfeeling for him.

Maybe he felt the same way.

I never felt such a lowdown hound in my life.

First thing I knew he was in the kitchenette cooking up the breakfast and I was handing Eileen her coffeecup and she was lying there handsome as a queen among her courtiers.

I couldn't face Thelma after that night.

I didn't even have the nerve to call her on the telephone.

I wrote her that I'd met up with Eileen and that old bonds had proved too strong and asked her to send my clothes down by express.

Of course I had to give her Eileen's address, but she never came near us.

All she did was write me a pleasant little note about how it was beautiful while it lasted but that now life had parted our ways and it was goodbye forever.

She never said a word about the fifty dollars.

She added a postscript begging me to be careful about drinking.

I must know that that was my greatest weakness underlined three times.

Afterwards I learned that Eileen had called Thelma on the telephone and made a big scene about Thelma trying to take her husband away.

That finished me with Thelma.

Trust Eileen to squeeze all the drama out of a situation.

And there I was shacked up with Eileen in that filthy fourth floor attic on Hudson Street.

I use the phrase advisedly because there was something positively indecent about our relationship.

I felt it and it ate on me all the time, but I didn't know how right I was till later.

What I did know was that Precious was always around.

He slept in the hall bedroom at the head of the stairs.

`` Who do you think pays the rent??

You wouldn't have me throw the poor boy out on the street '', Eileen said when I needled her about it.

I said sure that was what I wanted her to do but she paid no attention.

Eileen had a wonderful way of not listening to things she didn't want to hear.

Still I didn't think she was twotiming me with Precious right then.

To be on the safe side I never let Eileen get out of my sight day or night.

Precious had me worried.

I couldn't make out what his racket was.

I'd thought him a pimp or procurer but he didn't seem to be.

He was smooth and civil spoken but it seemed to me there was something tough under his selfeffacing manner.

Still he let Eileen treat him like a valet.

Whenever the place was cleaned or a meal served it was Precious who did the work.

I never could find out what his business was.

He always seemed to have money in his pocket.

The phone had been disconnected but telegrams came for him and notes by special messenger.

Now and then he would disappear for several days.

`` Connections '' was all he would say with that smooth hurt smile when I put leading questions.

`` Oh he's just an international spy '', Eileen would shout with her screechy laugh.

Poor devil he can't have been too happy either.

He got no relief from drink because, though sometimes Precious would buy himself a drink if he went out with us in the evening, he'd leave it on the table untouched.

When I was in liquor I rode him pretty hard I guess.

Occasionally if I pushed him too far he'd give me a look out of narrowed eyes and the hard cruel bony skull would show through that smooth face of his.

`` Some day '', I told Eileen, `` that guy will kill us both ''.

She just wouldn't listen.

Getting drunk every night was the only way I could handle the situation.

Eileen seemed to feel the same way.

We still had that much in common.

The trouble was drinking cost money.

The way Eileen and I were hitting it up, we needed ten or fifteen dollars an evening.

Eileen must have wheedled a little out of Precious.

I raised some kale by hocking the good clothes I had left over from my respectable uptown life, but when that was gone I didn't have a cent.

I don't know what we would have done if Pat O'Dwyer hadn't come to town.

Pat O'Dwyer looked like a heavier Jim.

He had the same bullet head of curly reddish hair but he didn't have Jim's pokerfaced humor or his brains or his charm.

He was a big thick beefy violent man.

Now Pat may have been a lecher and a plugugly, but he was a good churchgoing Catholic and he loved his little sister.

Those O'Dwyers had that Irish clannishness that made them stick together in spite of politics and everything.

Pat took Eileen and me out to dinner at a swell steak house and told us with tears in his eyes how happy he was we had come together again.

`` Whom God hath joined '' etcetera.

The O'Dwyers were real religious people except for Kate.

Now it would be up to me to keep the little girl out of mischief.

Pat had been worried as hell ever since she'd lost her job on that fashion magazine.

It had gone big with the Hollywood girls when he told them his sister was an editor of Art And Apparel.

How about me trying to help her get her job back??

All evening Eileen had been as demure as a little girl getting ready for her first communion.

It just about blew us both out of the water when Eileen suddenly came out with what she came out with.

`` But brother I can't take a job right now '', she said with her eyes on her ice cream, `` I'm going to have a baby, Francis Xavier's baby, my own husband's baby ''.

My first thought was how had it happened so soon, but I counted back on my fingers and sure enough we'd been living together six weeks.

Pat meanwhile was bubbling over with sentiment.

Greatest thing that ever happened.

Now Eileen really would have to settle down to love honor and obey, and she'd have to quit drinking.

He'd come East for the christening, by God he would.

When we separated that evening Pat pushed a hundred dollar bill into Eileen's hand to help towards a layette.

Before he left town Pat saw to it that I was fixed up with a job.

Pat had contacts all over the labor movement.

A friend of Pat's named Frank Sposato had just muscled into the Portwatchers' Union.

The portwatchers were retired longshoremen and small time seafarers off towboats and barges who acted as watchmen on the wharves.

Most of them were elderly men.

It was responsible and sometimes dangerous work because the thieving is awful in the port of New York.

They weren't as well paid as they should have been.

One reason the portwatchers let Sposato take them over was to get the protection of his musclemen.

Sposato needed a front, some labor stiff with a clean record to act as business agent of the Redhook local.

There I was a retired wobbly and structural iron worker who'd never gouged a cent off a fellow worker in my thirty years in the movement.

For once radicalism was a recommendation.

Sposato couldn't wait to get me hired.

With my gray hair and my weatherbeaten countenance I certainly looked the honest working stiff.

The things a man will do for a woman.

There was one fact which Rector could not overlook, one truth which he could not deny.

As long as there were two human beings working together on the same project, there would be competition and you could no more escape it than you could expect to escape the grave.

No matter how devoted a man was, no matter how fully he gave his life to the Lord, he could never extinguish that one spark of pride that gave him definition as an individual.

All of the jobs in the mission might be equal in the eyes of the Lord, but they were certainly not equal in the eyes of the Lord's servants.

It was only natural that Fletcher would strive for a position in which he could make the decisions.

Even Rector himself was prey to this spirit of competition and he knew it, not for a more exalted office in the hierarchy of the church -- his ambitions for the bishopry had died very early in his career -- but for the one clear victory he had talked about to the colonel.

He was not sure how much of this desire was due to his devotion to the church and how much was his own ego, demanding to be satisfied, for the two were intertwined and could not be separated.

He wanted desperately to see Kayabashi defeated, the Communists in the village rooted out, the mission standing triumphant, for in the triumph of the Lord he himself would be triumphant, too.

But perhaps this was a part of the eternal plan, that man's ambition when linked with God would be a driving, indefatigable force for good in the world.

He sighed.

How foolish it was to try to fathom the truth in an area where only faith would suffice.

He would have to work without questioning the motives which made him work and content himself with the thought that the eventual victory, however it was brought about, would be sweet indeed.

His first move was to send Hino to the village to spend a few days.

His arm had been giving him some trouble and Rector was not enough of a medical expert to determine whether it had healed improperly or whether Hino was simply rebelling against the tedious work in the print shop, using the stiffness in his arm as an excuse.

In any event Rector sent him to the local hospital to have it checked, telling him to keep his ears open while he was in the village to see if he could find out what Kayabashi was planning.

Hino was elated at the prospect.

He was allowed to spend his nights at an inn near the hospital and he was given some extra money to go to the pachinko parlor -- an excellent place to make contact with the enemy.

He left with all the joyous spirit of a child going on a holiday, nodding attentively as Rector gave him his final instructions.

He was to get involved in no arguments;;

he was to try to make no converts;;

he was simply to listen and report back what he heard.

It was a ridiculous situation and Rector knew it, for Hino, frankly partisan, openly gregarious, would make a poor espionage agent.

If he wanted to know anything, he would end up asking about it point-blank, but in this guileless manner he would probably receive more truthful answers than if he tried to get them by indirection.

In all of his experience in the mission field Rector had never seen a convert quite like Hino.

From the moment that Hino had first walked into the mission to ask for a job, any job -- his qualifications neatly written on a piece of paper in a precise hand -- he had been ready to become a Christian.

He had already been studying the Bible;;

he knew the fundamentals, and after studying with Fletcher for a time he approached Rector, announced that he wanted to be baptized and that was that.

Rector had never been able to find out much about Hino's past.

Hino talked very little about himself except for the infrequent times when he used a personal illustration in connection with another subject.

Putting the pieces of this mosaic together, Rector had the vague outlines of a biography.

Hino was the fourth son of an elderly farmer who lived on the coast, in Chiba, and divided his life between the land and the sea, supplementing the marginal livelihood on his small rented farm with seasonal employment on a fishing boat.

Without exception Hino's brothers turned to either one or both of their father's occupations, but Hino showed a talent for neither and instead spent most of his time on the beach where he repaired nets and proved immensely popular as a storyteller.

He had gone into the Japanese navy, had been trained as an officer, had participated in one or two battles -- he never went into detail regarding his military experience -- and at the age of twenty-five, quite as a bolt out of the blue, he had walked into the mission as if he belonged here and had become a Christian.

Rector was often curious;;

often tempted to ask questions but he never did.

If and when Hino decided to tell him about his experiences, he would do so unasked.

Rector had no doubt that Hino would come back from the village bursting with information, ready to impart it with his customary gusto, liberally embellished with his active imagnation.

When the telephone rang on the day after Hino went down to the village, Rector had a hunch it would be Hino with some morsel of information too important to wait until his return, for there were few telephones in the village and the phone in Rector's office rarely rang unless it was important.

He was surprised to find Kayabashi's secretary on the other end of the line.

He was even more startled when he heard what Kayabashi wanted.

The oyabun was entertaining a group of dignitaries, the secretary said, businessmen from Tokyo for the most part, and Kayabashi wished to show them the mission.

They had never seen one before and had expressed a curiosity about it.

`` Oh ''??

Rector said.

`` I guess it will be all right.

When would the oyabun like to bring his guests up here ''??

`` This afternoon '', the secretary said.

`` At three o'clock if it will be of convenience to you at that time ''.

`` All right '', Rector said.

`` I will be expecting them ''.

He was about to hang up the phone, but a note of hesitancy in the secretary's voice left the conversation open.

He had something more to say.

`` I beg to inquire if the back is now safe for travelers '', he said.

Rector laughed despite himself.

`` Unless the oyabun has been working on it '', he said, then checked himself and added: `` You can tell Kayabashi-san that the back road is in very good condition and will be quite safe for his party to use ''.

`` Arigato gosaimasu ''.

The secretary sighed with relief and then the telephone clicked in Rector's hand.

Rector had no idea why Kayabashi wanted to visit the mission.

For the oyabun to make such a trip was either a sign of great weakness or an indication of equally great confidence, and from all the available information it was probably the latter.

Kayabashi must feel fairly certain of his victory in order to make a visit like this, a trip which could be so easily misinterpreted by the people in the village.

At the same time, it was unlikely that any businessmen would spend a day in a Christian mission out of mere curiosity.

No, Kayabashi was bringing his associates here for a specific purpose and Rector would not be able to fathom it until they arrived.

When he had given the call a few moments thought, he went into the kitchen to ask Mrs. Yamata to prepare tea and sushi for the visitors, using the formal English china and the silver tea service which had been donated to the mission, then he went outside to inspect the grounds.

Fujimoto had a pile of cuttings near one side of the lawn.

Rector asked him to move it for the time being;;

he wanted the mission compound to be effortlessly spotless.

A good initial impression would be important now.

He went into the print shop, where Fletcher had just finished cleaning the press.

`` How many pamphlets do we have in stock ''??

Rector said.

`` I should say about a hundred thousand '', Fletcher said.

`` Why ''??

`` I would like to enact a little tableau this afternoon '', Rector said, He explained about the visit and the effect he wished to create, the picture of a very busy mission.

He did not wish to deceive Kayabashi exactly, just to display the mission activities in a graphic and impressive manner.

Fletcher nodded as he listened to the instructions and said he would arrange the things Rector requested.

Rector's next stop was at the schoolroom, where Mavis was monitoring a test.

He beckoned to her from the door and she slipped quietly outside.

He told her of the visitors and then of his plans.

`` How many children do you have present today ''??

He said.

She looked back toward the schoolroom.

`` Fifteen '', she said.

`` No, only fourteen.

The little Ito girl had had to go home.

She has a pretty bad cold ''.

`` I would like them to appear very busy today, not busy exactly, but joyous, exuberant, full of life.

I want to create the impression of a compound full of children.

Do you think you can manage it ''??

Mavis smiled.

`` I'll try ''.

As Rector was walking back toward the residential hall, Johnson came out of the basement and bounded up to him.

The altercation in the coffee house had done little to dampen his spirits, but he was still a little wary around Rector for they had not yet discussed the incident.

`` I think I've fixed the pump so we won't have to worry about it for a long time '', he said.

`` I've adjusted the gauge so that the pump cuts out before the water gets too low.

'' `` Fine '', Rector said.

He looked out over the expanse of the compound.

It was going to take a lot of activity to fill it.

`` Have you ever operated a transit ''??

He said.

`` No, sir '', Johnson said.

`` You are about to become a first-class surveyor '', Rector said.

`` When Konishi gets back with the jeep, I want you to round up two or three Japanese boys.

Konishi can help you.

You'll find an old transit in the basement.

The glass is out of it, but that won't matter.

It looks pretty efficient and that's the important thing ''.

He went on to explain what he had in mind.

Johnson nodded.

He said he could do it.

Rector was warming to his over-all strategy by the time he got back to the residential hall.

It was rather a childish game, all in all, but everybody seemed to be getting into the spirit of the thing and he could not remember when he had enjoyed planning anything quite so much.

He was not sure what effect it would have, but that was really beside the point when you got right down to it.

He was not going to lose the mission by default, and whatever reason Kayabashi had for bringing his little sight-seeing group to the mission, he was going to be in for a surprise.

He found Elizabeth in the parlor and asked her to make sure everything was in order in the residential hall, and then to take charge of the office while the party was here.

When everything had been done, Rector went back to his desk to occupy himself with his monthly report until three o'clock.

At two thirty he sent Fujimoto to the top of the wall at the northeast corner of the mission to keep an eye on the ridge road and give a signal when he first glimpsed the approach of Kayabashi's party.

Then Rector, attired in his best blue serge suit, sat in a chair out on the lawn, in the shade of a tree, smoking a cigarette and waiting.

The air was cooler here, and the lacy pattern of the trees threw a dappled shadow on the grass, an effect which he found pleasant.

She concluded by asking him to name another hour should this one be inconvenient.

The fish took the bait.

He replied that he could not imagine what importance there might be in thus meeting with a stranger, but -- joy of joys, he would be at home at the hour mentioned.

But when she called he had thought better of the matter and decided not to involve himself in a new entanglement.

She was told by the manservant who opened the door that his lordship was engaged on work from which he had left strict orders he was not to be disturbed.

Claire was bitterly disappointed but determined not to let the rebuff daunt her purpose.

She wrote again and now, abandoning for the moment the theme of love, she asked for help in the matter of her career.

She could act and she could write.

His lordship was concerned in the management of Drury Lane but, if there were no opportunities there, would he read and criticize her novel??

At last he consented to meet her, and following that brief interview Claire wrote him a yet more remarkable proposal:

Have you any objection to the following plan??

On Thursday evening we may go out of town together by some stage or mail about the distance of ten or twelve miles.

There we shall be free and unknown;;

we can return the following morning

She concluded by asking for a brief interview -- `` to settle with you where '' -- and she threw in a tribute to his `` gentle manners '' and `` the wild originality of your countenance ''.

She opened his reply with trembling fingers he agreed!!

And he would see her that evening.

Victory at last!!

At their meeting he told her not to bother about `` where '' -- he would attend to that.

There was one of the new forte-pianos in the room and, as Claire rose to go, he asked her to sing him one song before she left.

She sang him Scott's charming ballad `` Rosabelle '', which was the vogue of the moment.

She had never sung better.

`` Your voice is delightful '', he approved with a warm smile.

`` Tomorrow will be a new experience -- I have never before made love to a nightingale.

There have been cooing doves, chattering magpies, thieving jackdaws, a proud peacock, a silly goose, and a harpy eagle -- whom I was silly enough to mate with and who is now busy tearing at my vitals ''.

And so they went, he choosing of all places an inn near Medmenham Abbey, scene a generation ago of the obscene orgies of the Hellfire Club.

He regaled Claire with an account of the mock mass performed by the cassocked bloods, which he had had at firsthand from old Bud Dodington, one of the leaders of the so-called `` Order ''.

Each wore the monkish scourge at his waist but this, it seems, was not employed for self-flagellation.

Naked girls danced in the chancel of the Abbey, the youngest and seemingly the most innocent being chosen to read a sermon filled with veiled depravities.

The jaded amorist conjured up pictures of the blasphemous rites with relish.

Alas, all that belonged to the age of `` Devil Dashwood '' and `` Wicked Wilkes '', abbot and beadsman of the Order!!

The casual seduction of a seventeen-year-old bluestocking seemed tame by comparison.

They passed close by the turn to Bishopsgate.

A scant half mile away Shelley and Mary were doubtless sitting on their diminutive terrace, the air about them scented with stock, and listening to the nightingale who had nested in the big lime tree at the foot of the garden.

Charming and peaceful -- but what were charm and peace compared to high adventure??

Alone with the fabulous Byron!!

How many women had longed for the privilege that was hers.

How was she to behave, Claire wondered.

To be passive, to be girlishly shy was palpably absurd.

She was the pursuer as clearly as was Venus in Shakespeare's poem.

And while her Adonis did not suffer from inexperience, satiety might well be an equal handicap.

No, she would not pretend modesty, but neither must she be crudely bold.

Mystery -- that was the thing.

In the bedroom she would insist on darkness.

With his club foot he might well be grateful.

At the inn, which was situated close to a broad weir, Byron was greeted by the landlord with obsequious deference and addressed as `` milord ''.

The place was evidently a familiar haunt and Claire wondered what other illicit loves had been celebrated in the comfortable rooms to which they were shown.

The fire in the sitting room was lighted.

`` What about the bedroom ''??

Byron inquired.

`` Seems to me last time I was here the grate bellowed out smoke as it might have been preparing us for hell ''.

`` We found some owls had built a nest in the chimney, milord, but I promise you you'll never have trouble of that sort again ''.

So, not only had he been here before, but it seemed he might well come again.

Claire felt suddenly small and cheap, heroine of a trivial episode in the voluminous history of Don Juan.

A cold supper was ordered and a bottle of port.

When Napoleon's ship had borne him to Elba, French wines had started to cross the Channel, the first shipments in a dozen war-ridden years, but the supplies had not yet reached rural hostelries where the sweet wines of the Spanish peninsula still ruled.

As they waited for supper they sat by the fire, glasses in hand, while Byron philosophized as much for his own entertainment as hers.

`` Sex is overpriced '', he said.

`` The great Greek tragedies are concerned with man against Fate, not man against man for the prize of a woman's body.

So don't see yourself as a heroine or fancy this little adventure is an event of major importance ''.

`` The gods seemed to think sex pretty important '', she rebutted.

`` Mars and Venus, Bacchus and Ariadne, Jupiter and Io, Byron and the nymph of the owl's nest.

That would be Minerva, I suppose.

Wasn't the owl her symbol ''??

Byron laughed.

`` So you know something of the classics, do you ''??

`` Tell me about Minerva, how she behaved, what she did to please you ''.

`` I'll tell you nothing.

I don't ask you who 'tis you're being unfaithful to, husband or lover.

Frankly, I don't care ''.

For a moment she thought of answering with the truth but she knew there were men who shied away from virginity, who demanded some degree of education in body as well as mind.

`` Very well '', she said, `` I'll not catechize you.

What matter the others so long as I have my place in history ''.

She was striking the right note.

No man ever had a better opinion of himself and indeed, with one so favored, flattery could hardly seem overdone.

Brains and beauty, high position in both the social and intellectual worlds, athlete, fabled lover -- if ever the world was any man's oyster it was his.

The light supper over, Claire went to him and, slipping an arm about his shoulder, sat on his knee.

He drew her close and, hand on cheek, turned her face to his.

Her lips, moist and parted, spoke his name.

`` Byron ''!!

His hand went to her shoulder and pushed aside the knotted scarf that surmounted the striped poplin gown;;

then, to better purpose, he took hold of the knot and with dextrous fingers, untied it.

The bodice beneath was buttoned and, withdrawing his lips from hers, he set her upright on his knee and started to undo it, unhurriedly as if she were a child.

But, kindled by his kiss, his caressing hand, her desire was aflame.

She sprang up and went swiftly to the bedroom.

Lord Byron poured himself another glass of wine and held it up to the candle flame admiring the rich color.

He drank slowly with due appreciation.

It was an excellent vintage.

He rose and went to the bedroom.

Pausing in the doorway he said: `` The form of the human female, unlike her mind and her spirit, is the most challenging loveliness in all nature ''.

When Claire returned to Bishopsgate she longed to tell them she had become Byron's mistress.

By odd coincidence, on the evening of her return Shelley chose to read Parisina, which was the latest of the titled poet's successes.

As he declaimed the sonorous measures, it was as much as Claire could do to restrain herself from bursting out with her dramatic tidings.

`` Although it is not the best of which he is capable '', said Shelley as he closed the book, `` it is still poetry of a high order ''.

`` If he would only leave the East '', said Mary.

`` I am tired of sultans and scimitars ''.

`` The hero of his next poem is Napoleon Bonaparte '', said Claire, with slightly overdone carelessness.

`` How do you know that ''??

Demanded Mary.

`` I was told it on good authority '', Claire answered darkly.

`` I mustn't tell, I mustn't tell '', she repeated to herself.

`` I promised him I wouldn't ''.

Chapter 9

winter came, and with it Mary's baby -- a boy as she had wished.

William, he was called, in honor of the man who was at once Shelley's pensioner and his most bitter detractor.

With a pardonable irony Shelley wrote to the father who had publicly disowned his daughter:

`` Fanny and Mrs. Godwin will probably be glad to hear that Mary has safely recovered from a very favorable confinement, and that her child is well ''.

At the same time another child -- this one of Shelley's brain -- was given to the world: Alastor, a poem of pervading beauty in which the reader may gaze into the still depths of a fine mind's musings.

Alastor was published only to be savagely attacked, contemptuously ignored.

Shelley sent a copy to Southey, a former friend, and another to Godwin.

Neither acknowledged the gift.

Only Mary's praise sustained him in his disappointment.

She understood completely.

Not a thought nor a cadence was missed in her summary of appreciation.

`` You have made the labor worth while '', he said to her, smiling.

`` And in the future, since I write for a public of one, I can save the poor publishers from wasting their money ''.

`` A public of one '', Mary echoed reprovingly.

`` How can you say such a thing??

There will be thousands who will thrill to the loveliness of Alastor.

There are some even now.

What about that dear, clever Mr. Thynne??

I am sure he is in raptures ''.

`` Poor Mr. Thynne, he always has to be trotted out for my encouragement ''.

`` There are other Mr. Thynnes.

Not everyone is bewitched by Byron's caliphs and harem beauties ''.

Mary's supercritical attitude toward Byron had nothing to do with his moral disrepute.

She was resentful of his easy success as compared with Shelley's failure.

The same month that Alastor was published, Murray sold twenty thousand copies of The Siege Of Corinth, a slovenly bit of Byronism that even Shelley's generosity rebelled at.

The lordly poet was at low-water mark.

The careless writing was in keeping with his mood of savage discontent.

On all sides doors were being slammed in his face.

The previous scandals, gaily diverting as they were, had only served to increase his popularity.

Now, under the impact of his wife's disclosures, he was brought suddenly to the realization that there was a limit to tolerance, however brilliant, however far-famed the offender might be.

He tried defiance and openly flaunted his devotion to his half sister, but he soon saw, as did she, that this course if persisted in would involve them in a common ruin.

For the moment there was no woman in his life, and it was this vacuum that had given Claire her opportunity.

But the liaison successfully started in the last days of autumn was now languishing.

Byron, since the separation from his wife had been living in a smallish house in Piccadilly Terrace.

He refused to bring Claire to it even as an occasional visitor, claiming that his every move was watched by spies of the Milbankes.

Beckworth handed the pass to the colonel.

He had thought that the suggestion of taking it himself would tip the colonel in the direction of serving his own order, but the slip of paper was folded and absently thrust into the colonel's belt.

Despite his yearning, the colonel would not go down to see the men come through the lines.

He would remain in the tent, waiting impatiently, occupied by some trivial task.

-- Beckworth.

-- Sir??

-- Fetch me the copies of everything B and C companies have requisitioned in the last six months.

-- The last six months, sir??

-- You heard me.

There's a lot of waste going on here.

It's got to stop.

I want to take a look.

This is no damned holiday, Beckworth.

Get busy.

-- Yes, sir.

Beckworth left the tent.

Below he could see the bright torches lighting the riverbank.

He glanced back.

The colonel crouched tensely on one of the folding chairs, methodically tearing at his thumbnail.

The bombproof was a low-ceilinged structure of heavy timbers covered with earth.

It stood some fifty paces from the edge of the bank.

From the outside, it seemed no more than a low drumlin, a lump on the dark earth.

A crude ladder ran down to a wooden floor.

Two slits enabled observers to watch across the river.

The place smelled strongly of rank, fertile earth, rotting wood and urine.

The plank floor was slimed beneath Watson's boots.

At least the Union officer had been decent enough to provide a candle.

There was no place to sit, but Watson walked slowly from the ladder to the window slits and back, stooping slightly to avoid striking his head on the heavy beams.

In the corner was the soldier with the white flag.

He stood stiffly erect, clutching the staff, his body half hidden by the limp cloth.

Watson hardly looked at him.

The man had come floundering aboard the flat-bottomed barge at the last instant, brandishing the flag of truce.

Someone had hauled him over the side, and he had remained silent while they crossed.

An officer with a squad of men had been waiting on the bank.

The men in the boats had started yelling happily at first sight of the officer, two of them calling him Billy.

When the boat had touched, the weaker ones and the two wounded men had been lifted out and carried away by the soldiers.

Watson had presented his pouch and been led to the bombproof.

The officer had told him that both lists must be checked.

Watson had given his name and asked for a safe-conduct pass.

The officer, surprised, said he would have to see.

Watson had nodded absently and muttered that he would check the lists himself later.

He had peered through the darkness at the rampart.

The men he would take back across the river stood there, but he turned away from them.

He wanted no part of the emotions of the exchange, no memory of the joy and gratitude that other men felt.

He had hoped to be alone in the bombproof, but the soldier had followed him.

Though Watson carefully ignored the man, he could not deny his presence.

Perhaps it would be better to speak to him, since silence could not exorcise his form.

Watson glanced briefly at him, seeing only a body rigidly erect behind the languid banner.

-- We won't be too long.

If my pass is approved, I may be a half hour.

The soldier answered in a curious, muffled voice, his lips barely moving.

Watson turned away and did not see the man's knees buckle and his body sag.

-- Yes, sir.

He had acknowledged the man.

It was easier to think now, Watson decided.

The stiff figure in the corner no longer blocked his thoughts.

He paced slowly, stooping, staring at the damp, slippery floor.

He tried to order the words of the three Union officers, seeking to create some coherent portrait of the dead boy.

But he groped blindly.

His lack of success steadily eroded his interest.

He stopped pacing, leaned against the dank, timbered wall and let his mind drift.

A feeling of futility, an enervation of mind greater than any fatigue he had ever known, seeped through him.

What in the name of God was he doing, crouched in a timbered pit on the wrong bank of the river??

Why had he crossed the dark water, to bring back a group of reclaimed soldiers or to skulk in a foul-smelling hole??

He grew annoyed and at the same time surprised at that emotion.

He was conscious of a growing sense of absurdity.

Hillman had written it all out, hadn't he??

Wasn't the report official enough??

What did he hope to accomplish here??

Hillman had ordered him not to leave the far bank.

Prompted by a guilty urge, he had disobeyed the order of a man he respected.

For what??

To tell John something he would find out for himself.

The figure in the corner belched loudly, a deep, liquid eruption.

Watson snorted and then laughed aloud.

Exactly!!

The soldier's voice was muffled again, stricken with chagrin.

He clutched the staff, and his dark eyes blinked apologetically.

-- 'scuse me, sir.

-- Let's get out of here.

Watson ran up the ladder and stood for a second sucking in the cool air that smelled of mud and river weeds.

To his left, the two skiffs dented their sharp bows into the soft bank.

The flat-bottomed boat swung slowly to the pull of the current.

A soldier held the end of a frayed rope.

Three Union guards appeared, carrying their rifles at ready.

Watson stared at them curiously.

They were stocky men, well fed and clean-shaven, with neat uniforms and sturdy boots.

Behind them shambled a long column of weak, tattered men.

The thin gray figures raised a hoarse, cawing cry like the call of a bird flock.

They moved toward the skiffs with shocking eagerness, elbowing and shoving.

Four men were knocked down, but did not attempt to rise.

They crept down the muddy slope toward the waiting boats.

The Union soldiers grounded arms and settled into healthy, indifferent postures to watch the feeble boarding of the skiffs.

The crawling men tried to rise and fell again.

No one moved to them.

Watson watched two of them flounder into the shallow water and listened to their voices beg shrilly.

In a confused, soaked and stumbling shift of bodies and lifting arms, the two men were dragged into the same skiff.

The third crawling man forced himself erect.

He swayed like a drunkard, his arms milling in slow circles.

He paced forward unsteadily, leaning too far back, his head tilted oddly.

His steps were short and stiff, and, with his head thrown back, his progress was a supercilious strut.

He appeared to be peering haughtily down his nose at the crowded and unclean vessel that would carry him to freedom.

He stalked into the water and fell heavily over the side of the flat-bottomed barge, his weight nearly swamping the craft.

Watson looked for the fourth man.

He had reached the three passive guards;;

he crept in an incertain manner, patting the ground before him.

The guards did not look at him.

The figure on the earth halted, seemingly bewildered.

He sank back on his thin haunches like a weary hound.

Then he began to crawl again.

Watson watched the creeping figure.

He felt a spectator interest.

Would the man make it or not??

If only there was a clock for him to crawl against.

If he failed to reach the riverbank in five minutes, say, then the skiffs would pull away and leave him groping in the mud.

Say three minutes to make it sporting.

Still the guards did not move, but stood inert, aloof from the slow-scrambling man.

The figure halted, and Watson gasped.

The man began to creep in the wrong direction, deceived by a slight rise in the ground!!

He turned slowly and began to crawl back up the bank toward the rampart.

Watson raced for him, his boots slamming the soft earth.

The guards came to life with astonishing menace.

They spun and flung their rifles up.

Watson gesticulated wildly.

One man dropped to his knee for better aim.

-- Let me help him, for the love of God!!

The guards lowered their rifles and their rifles and peered at Watson with sullen, puzzled faces.

Watson pounded to the crawling man and stopped, panting heavily.

He reached down and closed his fingers on the man's upper arm.

Beneath his clutch, a flat strip of muscle surged on the bone.

Watson bent awkwardly and lifted the man to his feet.

Watson stared into a cadaverous face.

Two clotted balls the color of mucus rolled between fiery lids.

Light sticks of fingers, the tips gummy with dark earth, patted at Watson's throat.

The man's voice was a sweet, patient whisper.

-- Henry said that he'd take my arm and get me right there.

But you ain't Henry.

-- no.

-- It don't matter.

Is it far??

How far could it be, Watson thought bleakly, how far can a blind man crawl??

Another body length or all the rest of his nighted life??

-- Not far.

-- You talk deep.

Not like us fellas.

It raises the voice, bein in camp.

You Secesh??

-- yes.

Come on, now.

Can you walk??

-- Why, course I can.

I can walk real good.

Watson stumbled down the bank.

The man leaned his frail body against Watson's shoulder.

He was no heavier than a child.

Watson paused for breath.

The man wheezed weakly, his fetid breath beating softly against Watson's neck.

His sweet whisper came after great effort.

-- Oh, Christ.

I wish you was Henry.

He promised to take me.

-- hush.

We're almost there.

Watson supported the man to the edge of the bank and passed the frail figure over the bow of the nearest skiff.

The man swayed on a thwart, turning his ruined eyes from side to side.

Watson turned away, sickened for the first time in many months.

He heard the patient voice calling.

-- Henry??

Where are you, Henry??

-- Make him lie down!!

Watson snatched a deep breath.

He had not meant to shout.

He stood with his back to the skiff.

The men mewed and scratched, begging to be taken away.

Watson spoke bewilderedly to the dark night flecked with pine-knot torches.

-- Goddamn you!!

What do you do to them??

Intelligence jabbed at him accusingly.

He was angry, sickened.

He had not felt that during the afternoon.

No, nor later.

All his emotions had been inward, self-conscious.

In war, on a night like this, it was only the outward emotions that mattered, what could be flung out into the darkness to damage others.

Yes.

That was it.

He was sure of it.

John's type of man allowed this sort of thing to happen.

What a fool he had been to think of his brother!!

So Charles was dead.

What did it matter??

His name had been crossed off a list.

Already his cool body lay in the ground.

What words had any meaning??

What had he thought of, to go to John, grovel and beg understanding??

To confess with a canvas chair as a prie-dieu, gouging at his heart until a rough and stupid hand bade him rise and go??

Men were slaughtered every day, tumbled into eternity like so many torn parcels flung down a portable chute.

What made him think John had a right to witness his brother's humiliation??

What right had John to any special consideration??

Was John better, more deserving??

To hell with John.

Let him chafe with impatience to see Charles, rip open the note with trembling hands and read the formal report in Hillman's beautiful, schoolmaster's hand.

John would curse.

He believed that brave boys didn't cry.

Watson spat on the ground.

He was grimly satisfied.

He had stupidly thought himself compelled to ease his brother's pain.

Now he knew perfectly that he had but longed to increase his own suffering.

I would not want to be one of those writers who begin each morning by exclaiming, `` O Gogol, O Chekhov, O Thackeray and Dickens, what would you have made of a bomb shelter ornamented with four plaster-of-Paris ducks, a birdbath, and three composition gnomes with long beards and red mobcaps ''??

As I say, I wouldn't want to begin a day like this, but I often wonder what the dead would have done.

But the shelter is as much a part of my landscape as the beech and horse-chestnut trees that grow on the ridge.

I can see it from this window where I write.

It was built by the Pasterns, and stands on the acre of ground that adjoins our property.

It bulks under a veil of thin, new grass, like some embarrassing fact of physicalness, and I think Mrs. Pastern set out the statuary to soften its meaning.

It would have been like her.

She was a pale woman.

Sitting on her terrace, sitting in her parlor, sitting anywhere, she ground an axe of self-esteem.

Offer her a cup of tea and she would say, `` Why, these cups look just like a set I gave to the Salvation Army last year ''.

Show her the new swimming pool and she would say, slapping her ankle, `` I suppose this must be where you breed your gigantic mosquitoes ''.

Hand her a chair and she would say, `` Why, it's a nice imitation of those Queen Anne chairs I inherited from Grandmother Delancy ''.

These trumps were more touching than they were anything else, and seemed to imply that the nights were long, her children ungrateful, and her marriage bewilderingly threadbare.

Twenty years ago, she would have been known as a golf widow, and the sum of her manner was perhaps one of bereavement.

She usually wore weeds, and a stranger watching her board a train might have guessed that Mr. Pastern was dead, but Mr. Pastern was far from dead.

He was marching up and down the locker room of the Grassy Brae Golf Club shouting, `` Bomb Cuba!!

Bomb Berlin!!

Let's throw a little nuclear hardware at them and show them who's boss ''.

He was brigadier of the club's locker-room light infantry, and at one time or another declared war on Russia, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and China.

It all began on an autumn afternoon -- and who, after all these centuries, can describe the fineness of an autumn day??

One might pretend never to have seen one before, or, to more purpose, that there would never be another like it.

The clear and searching sweep of sun on the lawns was like a climax of the year's lights.

Leaves were burning somewhere and the smoke smelled, for all its ammoniac acidity, of beginnings.

The boundless blue air was stretched over the zenith like the skin of a drum.

Leaving her house one late afternoon, Mrs. Pastern stopped to admire the October light.

It was the day to canvass for infectious hepatitis.

Mrs. Pastern had been given sixteen names, a bundle of literature, and a printed book of receipts.

It was her work to go among her neighbors and collect their checks.

Her house stood on a rise of ground, and before she got into her car she looked at the houses below.

Charity as she knew it was complex and reciprocal, and almost every roof she saw signified charity.

Mrs. Balcolm worked for the brain.

Mrs. Ten Eyke did mental health.

Mrs. Trenchard worked for the blind.

Mrs. Horowitz was in charge of diseases of the nose and throat.

Mrs. Trempler was tuberculosis, Mrs. Surcliffe was Mothers' March of Dimes, Mrs. Craven was cancer, and Mrs. Gilkson did the kidney.

Mrs. Hewlitt led the birthcontrol league, Mrs. Ryerson was arthritis, and way in the distance could be seen the slate roof of Ethel Littleton's house, a roof that signified gout.

Mrs. Pastern undertook the work of going from house to house with the thoughtless resignation of an honest and traditional laborer.

It was her destiny;;

it was her life.

Her mother had done it before her, and even her old grandmother, who had collected money for smallpox and unwed mothers.

Mrs. Pastern had telephoned most of her neighbors in advance, and most of them were ready for her.

She experienced none of the suspense of some poor stranger selling encyclopedias.

Here and there she stayed to visit and drink a glass of sherry.

The contributions were ahead of what she had got the previous year, and while the money, of course, was not hers, it excited her to stuff her kit with big checks.

She stopped at the Surcliffes' after dusk, and had a Scotch-and-soda.

She stayed too late, and when she left, it was dark and time to go home and cook supper for her husband.

`` I got a hundred and sixty dollars for the hepatitis fund '', she said excitedly when he walked in.

`` I did everybody on my list but the Blevins and the Flannagans.

I want to get my kit in tomorrow morning -- would you mind doing them while I cook the dinner ''??

`` But I don't know the Flannagans '', Charlie Pastern said.

`` Nobody does, but they gave me ten last year ''.

He was tired, he had his business worries, and the sight of his wife arranging pork chops in the broiler only seemed like an extension of a boring day.

He was happy enough to take the convertible and race up the hill to the Blevins', thinking that they might give him a drink.

But the Blevins were away;;

their maid gave him an envelope with a check in it and shut the door.

Turning in at the Flannagans' driveway, he tried to remember if he had ever met them.

The name encouraged him, because he always felt that he could handle the Irish.

There was a glass pane in the front door, and through this he could see into a hallway where a plump woman with red hair was arranging flowers.

`` Infectious hepatitis '', he shouted heartily.

She took a good look at herself in the mirror before she turned and, walking with very small steps, started toward the door.

`` Oh, please come in '', she said.

The girlish voice was nearly a whisper.

She was not a girl, he could see.

Her hair was dyed, and her bloom was fading, and she must have been crowding forty, but she seemed to be one of those women who cling to the manners and graces of a pretty child of eight.

`` Your wife just called '', she said, separating one word from another, exactly like a child.

`` And I am not sure that I have any cash -- any money, that is -- but if you will wait just a minute I will write you out a check if I can find my checkbook.

Won't you step into the living room, where it's cozier ''??

A fire had just been lighted, he saw, and things had been set out for drinks, and, like any stray, his response to these comforts was instantaneous.

Where was Mr. Flannagan, he wondered.

Travelling home on a late train??

Changing his clothes upstairs??

Taking a shower??

At the end of the room there was a desk heaped with papers, and she began to riffle these, making sighs and and noises of girlish exasperation.

`` I am terribly sorry to keep you waiting '', she said, `` but won't you make yourself a little drink while you wait??

Everything's on the table ''.

`` What train does Mr. Flannagan come out on ''??

`` Mr. Flannagan is away '', she said.

Her voice dropped.

`` Mr. Flannagan has been away for six weeks.

''

`` I'll have a drink, then, if you'll have one with me ''.

`` If you will promise to make it weak ''.

`` Sit down '', he said, `` and enjoy your drink and look for your checkbook later.

The only way to find things is to relax ''.

All in all, they had six drinks.

She described herself and her circumstances unhesitatingly.

Mr. Flannagan manufactured plastic tongue depressors.

He travelled all over the world.

She didn't like to travel.

Planes made her feel faint, and in Tokyo, where she had gone that summer, she had been given raw fish for breakfast and so she had come straight home.

She and her husband had formerly lived in New York, where she had many friends, but Mr. Flannagan thought the country would be safer in case of war.

She would rather live in danger than die of loneliness and boredom.

She had no children;;

she had made no friends.

`` I've seen you, though, before '', she said with enormous coyness, patting his knee.

`` I've seen you walking your dogs on Sunday and driving by in the convertible.

''

The thought of this lonely woman sitting at her window touched him, although he was even more touched by her plumpness.

Sheer plumpness, he knew, is not a vital part of the body and has no procreative functions.

It serves merely as an excess cushion for the rest of the carcass.

And knowing its humble place in the scale of things, why did he, at this time of life, seem almost ready to sell his soul for plumpness??

The remarks she made about the sufferings of a lonely woman seemed so broad at first that he didn't know what to make of them, but after the sixth drink he put his arm around her and suggested that they go upstairs and look for her checkbook there.

`` I've never done this before '', she said later, when he was arranging himself to leave.

Her voice shook with feeling, and he thought it lovely.

He didn't doubt her truthfulness, although he had heard the words a hundred times.

`` I've never done this before '', they always said, shaking their dresses down over their white shoulders.

`` I've never done this before '', they always said, waiting for the elevator in the hotel corridor.

`` I've never done this before '', they always said, pouring another whiskey.

`` I've never done this before '', they always said, putting on their stockings.

On ships at sea, on railroad trains, in summer hotels with mountain views, they always said, `` I've never done this before ''.

`` Where have you been ''??

Mrs. Pastern asked sadly, when he came in.

`` It's after eleven ''.

`` I had a drink with the Flannagans ''.

`` She told me he was in Germany ''.

`` He came home unexpectedly ''.

Charlie ate some supper in the kitchen and went into the TV room to hear the news.

`` Bomb them ''!!

He shouted.

`` Throw a little nuclear hardware at them!!

Show them who's boss ''!!

But in bed he had trouble sleeping.

He thought first of his son and daughter, away at college.

He loved them.

It was the only meaning of the word that he had ever known.

Then he played nine imaginary holes of golf, choosing his handicap, his irons, his stance, his opponents, and his weather in detail, but the green of the links seemed faded in the light of his business worries.

His money was tied up in a Nassau hotel, an Ohio pottery works, and a detergent for window-washing, and luck had been running against him.

His worries harried him up out of bed, and he lighted a cigarette and went to the window.

In the starlight he could see the trees stripped of their leaves.

During the summer he had tried to repair some of his losses at the track, and the bare trees reminded him that his pari-mutuel tickets would still be lying, like leaves, in the gutters near Belmont and Saratoga.

Maple and ash, beech and elm, one hundred to win on Three in the fourth, fifty to win on Six in the third, one hundred to win on Two in the eighth.

Children walking home from school would scuff through what seemed to be his foliage.

Then, getting back into bed, he thought unashamedly of Mrs. Flannagan, planning where they would next meet and what they would do.

There are, he thought, so few true means of forgetfulness in this life that why should he shun the medicine even when the medicine seemed, as it did, a little crude??

It was not as though she noted clearly that her nephews had not been to see her for ten years, not since their last journey eastward to witness their Uncle Izaak being lowered into the rocky soil;;

that aside from due notification of certain major events in their lives( two marriages, two births, one divorce), Christmas and Easter cards of the traditional sort had been the only thin link she had with them through the widowed years.

Her thoughts were not discrete.

But there was a look about her mouth as though she were tasting lemons.

She grasped the chair arms and brought her thin body upright, like a bird alert for flight.

She turned and walked stiffly into the parlor to the dainty-legged escritoire, warped and cracked now from fifty years in an atmosphere of sea spray.

There she extracted two limp vellum sheets and wrote off the letters, one to Abel, one to Mark.

Once her trembling hand, with the pen grasped tight in it, was pressed against the paper the words came sharply, smoothly, as authoritatively as they would dropping from her own lips.

And the stiffly regal look of them, she saw grimly, lacked the quaver of age which, thwarting the efforts of her amazing will, ran through her spoken words like a thin ragged string.

`` Please come down as soon as you conveniently can '', the upright letters stalked from the broad-nibbed pen, `` I have an important matter to discuss with you ''.

To Abel: `` I am afraid there is not much to amuse small children here.

I should be obliged if you could make other arrangements for your daughters.

You may stay as long as you wish, of course, but if arranging for the care of the girls must take time into account, I think a day or two should be enough to finish our business in ''.

To Mark: `` Please give my regards to Myra ''.

She signed the letters quickly, stamped them, and placed them on the hall table for Raphael to mail in town.

Then she went back to the wicker chair and resolutely adjusted her eyes to the glare on the water.

`` My nephews will be coming down '', she said that evening as Angelina brought her dinner into the dining room, the whole meal on a vast linen-covered tray.

She looked at the girl speculatively from eyes which had paled with the years;;

from the early evening lights of them which had first startled Izaak to look at her in an uncousinly way, they had faded to a near-absence of color which had, possibly from her constant looking at the water, something of the light of the sea in them.

Angelina placed the tray on the table and with a flick of dark wrist drew off the cloth.

She smiled, and the teeth gleamed in her beautifully modeled olive face.

`` That will be so nice for you, Mrs. Packard '', she said.

Her voice was ripe and full and her teeth flashed again in Sicilian brilliance before the warm curved lips met and her mouth settled in repose.

`` Um '', said the old lady, and brought her eyes down to the tray.

`` You remember them, I suppose ''??

She glinted suspiciously at the dish before her: `` blowfish.

I hope Raphael bought them whole ''.

Angelina stepped back, her eyes roaming the tray for omissions.

Then she looked at the old woman again, her eyes calm.

`` Yes '', she said, `` I remember that they came here every summer.

I used to play with the older one sometimes, when he'd let me.

Abel ''??

The name fell with lazy affectionate remembrance from her lips.

For an instant the old aunt felt something indefinable flash through her smile.

She would have said triumph.

Then Angelina turned and with an easy grace walked toward the kitchen.

Jessica Packard lifted her head and followed the retreating figure, her eyes resting nearly closed on the unself-conscious rise and fall of the rounded hips.

For a moment she held her face to the empty doorway;;

then she snorted and groped for her fork.

There's no greater catastrophe in the universe, she reflected dourly, impaling tender green beans on the silver fork, than the dwindling away of a family.

Procreation, expansion, proliferation -- these are the laws of living things, with the penalty for not obeying them the ultimate in punishments: oblivion.

When the fate of the individual is visited on the group, then( the warm sweet butter dripped from her raised trembling fork and she pushed her head forward belligerently), ah, then the true bitterness of existence could be tasted.

And indeed the young garden beans were brackish in her mouth.

She was the last living of the older generation.

What had once been a widespread family -- at one time, she knew, there were enough Packards to populate an entire county -- had now narrowed down to the two boys, Abel and Mark.

She swung her eyes up to the blue of the window, her jaws gently mashing the bitter beans.

What hope lay in the nephews, she asked the intensifying light out there, with one married to a barren woman and the other divorced, having sired two girl children, with none to bear on the Packard name??

She ate.

It seemed to her, as it seemed each night, that the gloom drew itself in and became densest at the table's empty chairs, giving her the frequent illusion that she dined with shadows.

Here, too, she talked low, quirking her head at one or another of the places, most often at Izaak's armchair which faced her across the long table.

Or it might have been the absent nephews she addressed, consciously playing with the notion that this was one of the summers of their early years.

She thought again of her children, those two who had died young, before the later science which might have saved them could attach even a label to their separate malignancies.

The girl, her first, she barely remembered.

It could have been anyone's infant, for it had not survived the bassinet.

But the boy the boy had been alive yesterday.

Each successive movement in his growing was recorded on the unreeling film inside her.

He ran on his plump sticks of legs, freezing now and again into the sudden startled attitudes which the camera had caught and held on the paling photographs, all carefully placed and glued and labeled, resting in the fat plush album in the bottom drawer of the escritoire.

In the cruel clearness of her memory the boy remained unchanged, quick with the delight of laughter, and the pain with which she recalled that short destroyed childhood was still unendurable to her.

It was one with the desolate rocks and the alien water on those days when she hated the sea.

The brothers drove down together in Mark's small red sports car, Mark at the wheel.

They rarely spoke.

Abel sat and regarded the farm country which, spreading out from both sides of the road, rolled greenly up to where the silent white houses and long barns and silos nested into the tilled fields.

He saw the land with a stranger's eyes, all the old familiarness gone.

And it presented itself to him as it would to any stranger, impervious, complete in itself.

There was stability there, too -- a color which his life had had once.

That is what childhood is, he told himself.

Solid, settled lost.

In the stiff neutral lines of the telephone poles he saw the no-nonsense pen strokes of Aunt Jessica's letter.

What bad grace, what incredible selfishness he and Mark had shown.

The boyhood summers preceding their uncle's funeral might never have been.

They had closed over, absolutely, with the sealing of old Izaak's grave.

The small car flew on relentlessly.

The old woman, stubbornly reigning in the house above the crashing waters took on an ominous reality.

Abel moved and adjusted his long legs.

`` I suppose it has to do with the property '', Mark had said over the telephone when they had discussed their receipt of the letters.

Not until the words had been spoken did Abel suddenly see the old house and the insistent sea, and feel his contrition blotted out in one shameful moment of covetousness.

He and Mark were the last of the family, and there lay the Cape Ann property which had seemed to have no end, stretching from horizon to horizon, in those golden days of summer.

Now Abel turned his head to look at his brother.

Mark held the wheel loosely, but his fingers curved around it in a purposeful way and the deliberate set of his body spoke plainly of the figure he'd make in the years to come.

His sandy hair was already beginning to thin and recede at the sides, and Abel looked quickly away.

Mark easily looked years older than himself, settled, his world comfortably categorized.

The vacation traffic was becoming heavier as they approached the sea.

`` She didn't mention bringing Myra '', Mark said, maneuvering the car into the next lane.

`` She's probably getting old -- crotchety, I mean -- and we figured uh-uh, better not.

They've never met, you know.

But Myra wouldn't budge without an express invitation.

I feel kind of bad about it ''.

He gave Abel a quick glance and moved closer to the wheel, hugging it to him, and Abel caught this briefest of allusions to guilt.

`` I imagine the old girl hasn't missed us much '', Mark added, his eyes on the road.

Abel ignored the half-expressed bid for confirmation.

He smiled.

It was barely possible that his brother was right.

He could tell they were approaching the sea.

The air took on a special strength now that they'd left the fecund warmth of the farmland behind.

There was the smell of the coast, like a primeval memory, composed of equal parts salt water, clams, seaweed and northern air.

He turned from the flying trees to look ahead and saw with an inward boy's eye again the great fieldstone house which, built on one of the many acres of ancestral land bordering the west harbor, had been Izaak's bride-gift to his cousin-wife as the last century ended.

Mark's thoughts must have been keeping silent pace beside his own, climbing the same crags in dirty white sneakers, clambering out on top of the headland and coming upon the sudden glinting water at the same instant.

`` Remember the Starbird??

'' Mark asked, and Abel lifted his eyes from the double lines in the middle of the road, the twin white ribbons which the car swallowed rapidly as it ascended the crest of the hill and came down.

`` The Starbird, '' Abel said.

There was the day Uncle Izaak had, in an unexpected grandiose gesture, handed over the pretty sloop to Abel for keeps, on condition that he never fail to let his brother accompany him whenever younger the boy wished.

The two of them had developed into a remarkable sailing team all of this happening in a time of their lives when their youth and their brotherhood knitted them together as no other time or circumstance could.

They seemed then to have had a single mind and body, a mutuality which had been accepted with the fact of their youth, casually.

He saw the Starbird as she lay, her slender mast up and gently turning, its point describing constant languid circles against a cumulus sky.

Both of them had known the feeling of the small life in her waiting, ready, for the two of them to run up her sails.

The Starbird had been long at the bottom of the bay.

They came unexpectedly upon the sea.

Meeting it without preparation as they did, robbed of anticipation, a common disappointment seized them.

They were climbing the hill in the night when the headlights abruptly probed solid blackness, became two parallel luminous tubes which broadened out into a faint mist of light and ended.

Mark stopped the car and switched off the lights and they sat looking at the water, which, there being no moon out, at first could be distinguished from the sky only by an absence of stars.

His eyes were old and they never saw well, but heated with whisky they'd glare at my noise, growing red and raising up his rage.

I decided I hated the Pedersen kid too, dying in our kitchen while I was away where I couldn't watch, dying just to entertain Hans and making me go up snapping steps and down a drafty hall, Pa lumped under the covers at the end like dung covered with snow, snoring and whistling.

Oh he'd not care about the Pedersen kid.

He'd not care about getting waked so he could give up some of his whisky to a slit of a kid and maybe lose one of his hiding places in the bargain.

That would make him mad enough if he was sober.

I didn't hurry though it was cold and the Pedersen kid was in the kitchen.

He was all shoveled up like I thought he'd be.

I pushed at his shoulder, calling his name.

I think his name stopped the snoring but he didn't move except to roll a little when I shoved him.

The covers slid down his skinny neck so I saw his head, fuzzed like a dandelion gone to seed, but his face was turned to the wall -- there was the pale shadow of his nose on the plaster -- and I thought, Well you don't look much like a pig-drunk bully now.

I couldn't be sure he was still asleep.

He was a cagey sonofabitch.

I shook him a little harder and made some noise.

`` Pap-pap-pap-hey '', I said.

I was leaning too far over.

I knew better.

He always slept close to the wall so you had to lean to reach him.

Oh he was smart.

It put you off.

I knew better but I was thinking of the Pedersen kid mother-naked in all that dough.

When his arm came up I ducked away but it caught me on the side of the neck, watering my eyes, and I backed off to cough.

Pa was on his side, looking at me, his eyes winking, the hand that had hit me a fist in the pillow.

`` Get the hell out of here ''.

I didn't say anything, trying to get my throat clear, but I watched him.

He was like a mean horse to come at from the rear.

It was better, though, he'd hit me.

He was bitter when he missed.

`` Get the hell out of here ''.

`` Big Hans sent me.

He told me to wake you ''.

`` A fat hell on Big Hans.

Get out of here ''.

`` He found the Pedersen kid by the crib ''.

`` Get the hell out ''.

Pa pulled at the covers.

He was tasting his mouth.

`` The kid's froze good.

Hans is rubbing him with snow.

He's got him in the kitchen ''.

`` Pedersen ''??

`` No, Pa.

It's the Pedersen kid.

The kid ''.

`` Nothing to steal from the crib ''.

`` Not stealing, Pa.

He was just lying there.

Hans found him froze.

That's where he was when Hans found him ''.

Pa laughed.

`` I ain't hid nothing in the crib ''.

`` You don't understand, Pa.

The Pedersen kid.

The kid '' --

`` I goddamn well understand ''.

Pa had his head up, glaring, his teeth gnawing at the place where he'd grown a mustache once.

`` I goddamn well understand.

You know I don't want to see Pedersen.

That cock.

Why should I??

What did he come for, hey??

God dammit, get.

And don't come back.

Find out something.

You're a fool.

Both you and Hans.

Pedersen.

That cock.

Don't come back.

Out.

Out ''.

He was shouting and breathing hard and closing his fist on the pillow.

He had long black hairs on his wrist.

They curled around the cuff of his nightshirt.

`` Big Hans made me come.

Big Hans said '' --

`` A fat hell on Big Hans.

He's an even bigger fool than you are.

Fat, hey??

I taught him, dammit, and I'll teach you.

Out.

You want me to drop my pot ''??

He was about to get up so I got out, slamming the door.

He was beginning to see he was too mad to sleep.

Then he threw things.

Once he went after Hans and dumped his pot over the banister.

Pa'd been shit-sick in that pot.

Hans got an axe.

He didn't even bother to wipe himself off and he chopped part of Pa's door down before he stopped.

He might not have gone that far if Pa hadn't been locked in laughing fit to shake the house.

That pot put Pa in an awful good humor whenever he thought of it.

I always felt the memory was present in both of them, stirring in their chests like a laugh or a growl, as eager as an animal to be out.

I heard Pa cursing all the way downstairs.

Hans had laid steaming towels over the kid's chest and stomach.

He was rubbing snow on the kid's legs and feet.

Water from the snow and water from the towels had run off the kid to the table where the dough was, and the dough was turning pasty, sticking to the kid's back and behind.

`` Ain't he going to wake up ''??

`` What about your pa ''??

`` He was awake when I left ''.

`` What'd he say??

Did you get the whisky ''??

`` He said a fat hell on Big Hans ''.

`` Don't be smart.

Did you ask him about the whisky ''??

`` Yeah ''.

`` Well ''??

`` He said a fat hell on Big Hans ''.

`` Don't be smart.

What's he going to do ''??

`` Go back to sleep most likely ''.

`` You'd best get that whisky ''.

`` You go.

Take the axe.

Pa's scared to hell of axes ''.

`` Listen to me, Jorge, I've had enough to your sassing.

This kid's froze bad.

If I don't get some whisky down him he might die.

You want the kid to die??

Do you??

Well, get your pa and get that whisky ''.

`` Pa don't care about the kid ''.

`` Jorge ''.

`` Well he don't.

He don't care at all, and I don't care to get my head busted neither.

He don't care, and I don't care to have his shit flung on me.

He don't care about anybody.

All he cares about is his whisky and that dry crack in his face.

Get pig-drunk -- that's what he wants.

He don't care about nothing else at all.

Nothing.

Not Pedersen's kid neither.

That cock.

Not the kid neither ''.

`` I'll get the spirits '', Ma said.

I'd wound Big Hans up tight.

I was ready to jump but when Ma said she'd get the whisky it surprised him like it surprised me, and he ran down.

Ma never went near the old man when he was sleeping it off.

Not any more.

Not for years.

The first thing every morning when she washed her face she could see the scar on her chin where he'd cut her with a boot cleat, and maybe she saw him heaving it again, the dirty sock popping out as it flew.

It should have been nearly as easy for her to remember that as it was for Big Hans to remember going after the axe while he was still spattered with Pa's yellow sick insides.

`` No you won't '', Big Hans said.

`` Yes, Hans, if they're needed '', Ma said.

Hans shook his head but neither of us tried to stop her.

If we had, then one of us would have had to go instead.

Hans rubbed the kid with more snow rubbed rubbed.

`` I'll get more snow '', I said.

I took the pail and shovel and went out on the porch.

I don't know where Ma went.

I thought she'd gone upstairs and expected to hear she had.

She had surprised Hans like she had surprised me when she said she'd go, and then she surprised him again when she came back so quick like she must have, because when I came in with the snow she was there with a bottle with three white feathers on its label and Hans was holding it angrily by the throat.

Oh, he was being queer and careful, pawing about in the drawer and holding the bottle like a snake at the length of his arm.

He was awful angry because he'd thought Ma was going to do something big, something heroic even, especially for her I know him I know him we felt the same sometimes while Ma wasn't thinking about that at all, not anything like that.

There was no way of getting even.

It wasn't like getting cheated at the fair.

They were always trying so you got to expect it.

Now Hans had given Ma something of his -- we both had when we thought she was going straight to Pa -- something valuable;;

but since she didn't know we'd given it to her, there was no easy way of getting it back.

Hans cut the foil off finally and unscrewed the cap.

He was put out too because there was only one way of understanding what she'd done.

Ma had found one of Pa's hiding places.

She'd found one and she hadn't said a word while Big Hans and I had hunted and hunted as we always did all winter, every winter since the spring that Hans had come and I had looked in the privy and found the first one.

Pa had a knack for hiding.

He knew we were looking and he enjoyed it.

But now Ma.

She'd found it by luck most likely but she hadn't said anything and we didn't know how long ago it'd been or how many other ones she'd found, saying nothing.

Pa was sure to find out.

Sometimes he didn't seem to because he hid them so well he couldn't find them himself or because he looked and didn't find anything and figured he hadn't hid one after all or had drunk it up.

But he'd find out about this one because we were using it.

A fool could see what was going on.

If he found out Ma found it -- that'd be bad.

He took pride in his hiding.

It was all the pride he had.

I guess fooling Hans and me took doing.

But he didn't figure Ma for much.

He didn't figure her at all, and if he found out a woman it'd be bad.

Hans poured some in a tumbler.

`` You going to put more towels on him ''??

`` No ''.

`` Why not??

That's what he needs, something warm to his skin, don't he ''??

`` Not where he's froze good.

Heat's bad for frostbite.

That's why I only put towels on his chest and belly.

He's got to thaw slow.

You ought to know that ''.

Colors on the towels had run.

Ma poked her toe in the kid's clothes.

`` What are we going to do with these ''??

Big Hans began pouring whisky in the kid's mouth but his mouth filled without any getting down his throat and in a second it was dripping from his chin.

`` Here, help me prop him up.

I got hold his mouth open ''.

I didn't want to touch him and I hoped Ma would do it but she kept looking at the kid's clothes piled on the floor and the pool of water by them and didn't make any move to.

`` Come on, Jorge ''.

`` All right ''.

`` Lift, don't shove lift ''.

`` O.K., I'm lifting ''.

I took him by the shoulders.

His head flopped back.

His mouth fell open.

The skin on his neck was tight.

He was cold all right.

`` Hold his head up.

He'll choke ''.

`` His mouth is open ''.

`` His throat's shut.

He'll choke ''.

`` He'll choke anyway ''.

`` Hold his head up ''.

`` I can't ''.

`` Don't hold him like that.

Put your arms around him ''.

`` Well Jesus ''.

He was cold all right.

I put my arm carefully around him.

Hans had his fingers in the kid's mouth.

`` Now he'll choke for sure ''.

`` Shut up.

Just hold him like I told you ''.

He was cold all right, and wet.

I had my arm behind his back.

He was in his mid-fifties at this time, long past the establishment of his name and the wish to be lionized yet once again, and it was almost a decade since he had sworn off lecturing.

There was never a doubt any more how his structures would be received;;

it was always the same unqualified success now.

He could no longer build anything, whether a private residence in his Pennsylvania county or a church in Brazil, without it being obvious that he had done it, and while here and there he was taken to task for again developing the same airy technique, they were such fanciful and sometimes even playful buildings that the public felt assured by its sense of recognition after a time, a quality of authentic uniqueness about them, which, once established by an artist as his private vision, is no longer disputable as to its other values.

Stowey Rummel was internationally famous, a crafter of a genuine Americana in foreign eyes, an original designer whose inventive childishness with steel and concrete was made even more believably sincere by his personality.

He had lived for almost thirty years in this same stone farmhouse with the same wife, a remarkably childish thing in itself;;

he rose at half-past six every morning, made himself some French coffee, had his corn flakes and more coffee, smoked four cigarettes while reading last Sunday's Herald Tribune and yesterday's Pittsburgh Gazette, then put on his high-topped farmer's shoes and walked under a vine bower to his workshop.

This was an enormously long building whose walls were made of rocks, some of them brought home from every continent during his six years as an oil geologist.

The debris of his other careers was piled everywhere;;

a pile of wire cages for mice from his time as a geneticist and a microscope lying on its side on the window sill, vertical steel columns wired for support to the open ceiling beams with spidery steel cantilevers jutting out into the air, masonry constructions on the floor from the time he was inventing his disastrous fireplace whose smoke would pass through a whole house, visible all the way up through wire gratings on each floor.

His files, desk, drafting board and a high stool formed the only clean island in the chaos.

Everywhere else his ideas lay or hung in visible form: his models, drawings, ten-foot canvases in monochromes from his painting days, and underfoot a windfall of broken-backed books that looked as though their insides had been ransacked by a maniac.

Bicycle gear-sets he had once used as the basis of the design for the Camden Cycly Company plant hung on a rope in one corner, and over his desk, next to several old and dusty hats, was a clean pair of roller skates which he occasionally used up and down in front of his house.

He worked standing, with his left hand in his pocket as though he were merely stopping for a moment, sketching with the surprised stare of one who was watching another person's hand.

Sometimes he would grunt softly to some invisible onlooker beside him, sometimes he would look stern and moralistic as his pencil did what he disapproved.

It all seemed -- if one could have peeked in at him through one of his windows -- as though this broken-nosed man with the muscular arms and wrestler's neck was merely the caretaker trying his hand at the boss's work.

This air of disengagement carried over to his apparent attitude toward his things, and people often mistook it for boredom in him or a surrender to repetitious routine.

But he was not bored at all;;

he had found his style quite early in his career and he thought it quite wonderful that the world admired it, and he could not imagine why he should alter it.

There are, after all, fortunate souls who hear everything, but only know how to listen to what is good for them, and Stowey was, as things go, a fortunate man.

He left his home the day after New Year's wearing a mackinaw and sheepskin mittens and without a hat.

He would wear this same costume in Florida, despite his wife Cleota's reminders over the past five days that he must take some cool clothes with him.

But he was too busy to hear what she was saying.

So they parted when she was in an impatient humor.

When he was bent over behind the wheel of the station wagon, feeling in his trouser cuffs for the ignition key which he had dropped a moment before, she came out of the house with an enormous Rumanian shawl over her head, which she had bought in that country during one of their trips abroad, and handed him a clean handkerchief through the window.

Finding the key under his shoe, he started the engine, and while it warmed up he turned to her standing there in the dripping fog, and said, `` Defrost the refrigerator ''.

He saw the surprise in her face, and laughed as though it were the funniest expression he had ever seen.

He kept on laughing until she started laughing with him.

He had a deep voice which was full of good food she had cooked, and good humor;;

an explosive laugh which always carried everything before it.

He would settle himself into his seat to laugh.

Whenever he laughed it was all he was doing.

And she was made to fall in love with him again there in the rutted dirt driveway standing in the cold fog, mad as she was at his going away when he really didn't have to, mad at their both having got older in a life that seemed to have taken no more than a week to go by.

She was forty-nine at this time, a lanky woman of breeding with an austere, narrow face which had the distinction of a steeple or some architecture that had been designed long ago for a stubborn sort of prayer.

Her eyebrows were definite and heavy and formed two lines moving upward toward a high forehead and a great head of brown hair that fell to her shoulders.

There was an air of blindness in her gray eyes, the startled-horse look that ultimately comes to some women who are born at the end of an ancestral line long since divorced from money-making and which, besides, has kept its estate intact.

She was personally sloppy, and when she had colds would blow her nose in the same handkerchief all day and keep it, soaking wet, dangling from her waist, and when she gardened she would eat dinner with dirt on her calves.

But just when she seemed to have sunk into some depravity of peasanthood she would disappear and come down bathed, brushed, and taking breaths of air, and even with her broken nails her hands would come to rest on a table or a leaf with a thoughtless delicacy, a grace of history, so to speak, and for an instant one saw how ferociously proud she was and adamant on certain questions of personal value.

She even spoke differently when she was clean, and she was clean now for his departure and her voice clear and rather sharp.

`` Now drive carefully, for God's sake ''!!

She called, trying to attain a half humorous resentment at his departure.

But he did not notice, and was already backing the car down to the road, saying `` Toot-toot ''!!

To the stump of a tree as he passed it, the same stump which had impaled the car of many a guest in the past thirty years and which he refused to have removed.

She stood clutching her shawl around her shoulders until he had swung the car onto the road.

Then, when he had it pointed down the hill, he stopped to gaze at her through the window.

She had begun to turn back toward the house, but his look caught her and she stood still, waiting there for what his expression indicated would be a serious word of farewell.

He looked at her out of himself, she thought, as he did only for an instant at a time, the look which always surprised her even now when his uncombable hair was yellowing a little and his breath came hard through his nicotine-choked lungs, the look of the gaunt youth she had suddenly found herself staring at in the Tate Gallery on a Thursday once.

Now she kept herself protectively ready to laugh again and sure enough he pointed at her with his index finger and said `` Toot ''!!

Once more and roared off into the fog, his foot evidently surprising him with the suddenness with which it pressed the accelerator, just as his hand did when he worked.

She walked back to the house and entered, feeling herself returning, sensing some kind of opportunity in the empty building.

There is a death in all partings, she knew, and promptly put it out of her mind.

She enjoyed great parties when she would sit up talking and dancing and drinking all night, but it always seemed to her that being alone, especially alone in her house, was the realest part of life.

Now she could let out the three parakeets without fear they would be stepped on or that Stowey would let them out one of the doors;;

she could dust the plants, then break off suddenly and pick up an old novel and read from the middle on;;

improvise cha-chas on the harp;;

and finally, the best part of all, simply sit at the plank table in the kitchen with a bottle of wine and the newspapers, reading the ads as well as the news, registering nothing on her mind but letting her soul suspend itself above all wishing and desire.

She did this now, comfortably aware of the mist running down the windows, of the silence outside, of the dark afternoon it was getting to be.

She fell asleep leaning on her hand, hearing the house creaking as though it were a living a private life of its own these two hundred years, hearing the birds rustling in their cages and the occasional whirring of wings as one of them landed on the table and walked across the newspaper to perch in the crook of her arm.

Every few minutes she would awaken for a moment to review things: Stowey, yes, was on his way south, and the two boys were away in school, and nothing was burning on the stove, and Lucretia was coming for dinner and bringing three guests of hers.

Then she fell asleep again as soddenly as a person with fever, and when she awoke it was dark outside and the clarity was back in her eyes.

She stood up, smoothing her hair down, straightening her clothes, feeling a thankfulness for the enveloping darkness outside, and, above everything else, for the absence of the need to answer, to respond, to be aware even of Stowey coming in or going out, and yet, now that she was beginning to cook, she glimpsed a future without him, a future alone like this, and the pain made her head writhe, and in a moment she found it hard to wait for Lucretia to come with her guests.

She went into the living room and turned on three lamps, then back into the kitchen where she turned on the ceiling light and the switch that lit the floods on the barn, illuminating the driveway.

She knew she was feeling afraid and inwardly laughed at herself.

They were both so young, after all, so unready for any final parting.

How could it have been thirty years already, she wondered??

But yes, nineteen plus thirty was forty-nine, and she was forty-nine and she had been married at nineteen.

She stood still over the leg of lamb, rubbing herbs into it, quite suddenly conscious of a nausea in her stomach and a feeling of wrath, a sensation of violence that started her shivering.

But they all said, `` No, your time will come.

Enjoy being a bride while you can ''.

There was no room for company in the tiny Weaning House( where the Albright boys always took their brides, till they could get a house and a farm of their own).

So when the Big House filled up and ran over, the sisters-in-law found beds for everyone in their own homes.

And there was still not anything that Linda Kay could do.

So Linda Kay gave up asking, and accepted her reprieve.

Without saying so, she was really grateful;;

for to attend the dying was something she had never experienced, and certainly had not imagined when she thought of the duties she would have as Bobby Joe's wife.

She had made curtains for all the windows of her little house, and she had kept it spotless and neat, shabby as it was, and cooked good meals for Bobby Joe.

She had done all the things she had promised herself she would do, but she had not thought of this.

People died, she would have said, in hospitals, or in cars on the highway at night.

Bobby Joe was gone all day now, not coming in for dinner and sometimes not for supper.

When they first married he had been working in the fields all day, and she would get in the car and drive to wherever he was working, to take him a fresh hot meal.

Now there was no work in the fields, nor would there be till it rained, and she did not know where he went.

Not that she complained, or had any cause to.

Four or five of the cousins from East Texas were about his age, so naturally they ran around together.

There was no reason for her to ask what they did.

Thus a new pattern of days began to develop, for Granny Albright did not die.

She lay still on the bed, her head hardly denting the pillow;;

sometimes she opened her eyes and looked around, and sometimes she took a little milk or soup.

They stopped expecting her to die the next minute, but only in the next day or two.

Those who had driven hundreds of miles for the burial would not go home, for she might die any time;;

but they might as well unpack their suitcases, for she might linger on.

So the pattern was established.

When Linda Kay had put up her breakfast dishes and mopped her linoleum rugs, she would go to the Big House.

There was not anything she could do there, but that was where everyone was, or would be.

Bobby Joe and the boys would come by, say `` How's Granny ''??

And sit on the porch a while.

The older men would be there at noon, and maybe rest for a time before they took their guns off to the creek or drove down the road towards town.

The women and children stayed at the Albrights'.

The women, keeping their voices low as they worked around the house or sat in the living room, sounded like chickens shut up in a coop for the night.

The children had to play away from the house( in the barn loft or the pasture behind the barn), to maintain a proper quietness.

Off and on, all day, someone would be wiping at the powdery gray dust that settled over everything.

The evaporative cooler had been moved to Granny's room, and her door was kept shut;;

so that the rest of the house stayed open, though there was a question as to whether it was hotter or cooler that way.

The dust clogged their throats, and the heat parched them, so that the women were always making ice water.

They had cleaned up an old ice box and begun to buy fifty-pound blocks of ice in town, as the electric refrigerator came nowhere near providing enough ice for the crowds who ate and drank there.

One afternoon, as the women sat clucking softly, a new carload of people pulled up at the gate.

It was a Cadillac, black grayed with the dust of the road, its windows closed tight so you knew that the people who climbed out of it would be cool and unwrinkled.

They were an old fat couple( as Linda Kay described them to herself), a thick middle-aged man, and a girl about ten or twelve.

There was much embracing, much exclaiming.

`` Cousin Ada!!

Cousin John ''!!

`` Cousin Lura ''!!

`` Cousin Howard ''!!

`` And how is she ''??

`` About the same, John, about the same ''.

All the women got up and offered their chairs, and when they were all seated again, the guests made their inquiries and their explanations.

`` We were on our vacation in Canada '', Howard explained, in a muffled voice that must have been used to booming, `` and the news didn't catch up with us till we were nearly home.

We came on as soon as we could ''.

There was the suggestion of ice water, and -- in spite of the protest `` We're not really thirsty '' -- Linda Kay, to escape the stuffy air and the smothering soft voices, hurried to the kitchen.

She filled a big pitcher and set it, with glasses, on a tray.

Carrying it to the living room, she imagined the picture she made: tall and roundly slim, a bit sophisticated in her yellow sheath, with a graceful swingy walk that she had learned as a twirler with the school band.

Almost immediately she was ashamed of herself for feeling vain, at such a time, in such a place, and she tossed back her long yellow hair, smiling shyly as she entered the room.

Howard( the thick middle-aged man) was looking at her.

She felt the look and looked back because she could not help it, seeing that he was neither as old nor as thick as she had at first believed.

`` And who is this ''??

He asked, when she passed him a glass.

`` Oh that's Linda Kay '', Mama Albright said fondly.

`` She married our baby boy, Bobby Joe, this summer ''.

`` Let's see '', Cousin Ada said.

`` He's a right smart younger than the rest ''??

`` Oh yes '', Mama laughed.

`` He's ten years younger than Ernest.

We didn't expect him to come along;;

thought for the longest he was a tumor ''.

This joke was not funny to Linda Kay, and she blushed, as she always did;;

then, hearing the muffled boom of Howard's laughter, blushed redder.

`` Who is Howard, anyway ''??

She asked Bobby Joe that night.

`` He makes me uncomfortable ''.

`` Oh he's a second cousin or something.

He got in the oil business out at Odessa and lucked into some money ''.

`` How old is he ''??

`` Gosh, I don't know.

Thirty-five, I guess.

He's been married and got this half-grown kid.

If he bothers you, don't pay him any mind.

He's just a big windbag ''.

Bobby Joe was thinking about something else.

`` Say, did you know they're fixing to have a two-day antelope season on the Double J ''??

He was talking about antelope again when they woke up.

`` Listen, I never had a chance to kill an antelope.

There never was a season before, but now they want to thin 'em out on account of the drouth ''.

`` Did he ever visit here when he was a kid ''??

Linda Kay asked.

`` Who ''??

`` Howard ''.

`` Hell, I don't know.

When he was a kid I wasn't around ''.

Bobby Joe took a gun from behind the door, and with a quick `` Bye now '' was gone for the day.

Almost immediately Howard and his daughter Debora drove up in the Cadillac.

`` We're going after ice '', Howard said, `` and thought maybe you'd go along and keep us company ''.

There was really no reason to refuse, and Linda Kay had never ridden in a Cadillac.

Driving along the caliche-topped road to town, Howard talked.

Finally he said, `` Tell me about yourself '', and Linda Kay told him, because she thought herself that she had had an interesting life.

She was such a well-rounded teenager, having been a twirler, Future Farmers sweetheart, and secretary of Future Homemakers.

In her sophomore year she had started going steady with Bobby Joe, who was a football player, Future Homemakers sweetheart, and president of Future Farmers.

It was easy to see that they were made for each other, and they knew what they wanted.

Bobby Joe would be a senior this year, and he planned to graduate.

But there was no need for Linda Kay to go on, since all she wanted in life was to make a home for Bobby Joe and( blushing) raise his children.

Howard sighed.

`` You lucky kids '', he said.

`` I'd give anything if I could have found a girl like you ''.

Then he told Linda Kay about himself.

Of course he couldn't say much, really, because of Debora, but Linda Kay could imagine what kind of woman his wife had been and what a raw deal he had got.

It made her feel different about Howard.

She was going to tell Bobby Joe about how mistaken she had been, but he brought one of the cousins home for supper, and all they did was talk about antelope.

Bobby Joe was trying to get Linda Kay to say she would cook one if he brought it home.

`` Cook a whole antelope ''??

She exclaimed.

`` Why, I couldn't even cook a piece of antelope steak;;

I never even saw any ''.

`` Oh, you could.

I want to roast the whole thing, and have it for the boys ''.

Linda Kay told him he couldn't do anything like that with his Grandma dying, and he said well they had to eat, didn't they, they weren't all dying.

Linda Kay felt like going off to the bedroom to cry;;

but they were going up to the Big House after supper, and she had to put on a clean dress and fix her hair a little.

Every night they all went to Mama and Papa Albright's, and sat on the open front porch, where they could get the breeze.

It was full-of-the-moon( or a little past), and nearly light as day.

They all sat around and drank ice water, and the men smoked, and everybody had a good time.

Once in a while they said what a shame it was, with Granny dying, but they all agreed she wouldn't have wanted it any other way.

That night the older men got to talking about going possum-hunting on a moonlight night.

Bobby Joe and two or three of the other boys declared they had never been possum-hunting, and Uncle Bill Farnworth( from Mama Albright's side of the family) said he would just get up from there and take them, right then.

After they had left, some of the people moved around, to find more comfortable places to sit.

There were not many chairs, so that some preferred to sit on the edge of the porch, resting their feet on the ground, and others liked to sit where they could lean back against the wall.

Howard, who had been sitting against the wall, said he needed more fresh air, and took the spot on the edge of the porch where Bobby Joe had been sitting.

`` You'll be a darn sight more comfortable there, Howard '', Ernest said, laughing, and they all laughed.

Linda Kay felt that she was not exactly more comfortable.

Bobby Joe had been sitting close to her, touching her actually, and holding her hand from time to time, but it seemed at once that Howard sat much closer.

Perhaps it was just that he had so much more flesh, so that more of it seemed to come in contact with hers;;

but she had never been so aware of anyone's flesh before.

Still she was not sorry he sat by her, but in fact was flattered.

He had become the center of the company, such stories he had to tell.

He had sold oil stock to Bob Hope and Bing Crosby in person;;

he had helped fight an oil-well fire that raged six days and nights.

`` But tell me, doctor, where do you plan to conduct the hatching ''??

Alex asked.

`` That will have to be in the hotel '', the doctor retorted, confirming Alex's anticipations.

`` What I want you to do is to go to the market with me early tomorrow morning and help smuggle the hen back into the hotel ''.

The doctor paid the bill and they repaired to the hotel, room number nine, to initiate Alex further into these undertakings.

The doctor opened the smallest of his cases, an unimposing straw bag, and exposed the contents for Alex's inspection.

Inside, carefully packed in straw, were six eggs, but the eye of a poultry psychologist was required to detect what scientifically valuable specimentalia lay inside;;

to Alex they were merely six not unusual hens' eggs.

There was little enough time to contemplate them, however;;

in an instant the doctor was stalking across the room with an antique ledger in his hands, thoroughly eared and big as a table top.

He placed it on Alex's lap.

`` This is my hen ledger '', he informed him in an absorbed way.

`` It's been going since 1908 when I was a junior in college.

That first entry there is the Vermont Flumenophobe, the earliest and one of the most successful of my eighty-three varieties -- great big scapulars and hardly any primaries at all.

Couldn't take them near a river, though, or they'd squawk like a turkey cock the day before Thanksgiving ''.

The ledger was full of most precise information: date of laying, length of incubation period, number of chick reaching the first week, second week, fifth week, weight of hen, size of rooster's wattles and so on, all scrawled out in a hand that looked more Chinese than English, the most jagged and sprawling Alex had ever seen.

Below these particulars was a series of alpha-beta-gammas connected by arrows and crosses which denoted the lineage of the breed.

Alex's instruction was rapid, for the doctor had to go off to the Rue Ecole De Medecine to hear more speeches with only time for one sip of wine to sustain him through them all.

But after the doctor's return that night Alex could see, from the high window in his own room, the now familiar figure crouched on a truly impressive heap of towels, apparently giving its egg-hatching powers one final chance before it was replaced in its office by a sure-enough hen.

A knocking at Alex's door roused him at six o'clock the following morning.

It was the doctor, dressed and ready for the expedition to the market, and Alex was obliged to prepare himself in haste.

The doctor stood about, waiting for Alex to dress, with a show of impatience, and soon they were moving, as quietly as could be, through the still-dark hallways, past the bedroom of the patronne, and so into the street.

The market was not far and, once there, the doctor's sense of immediacy left him and he fell into a state of harmony with the birds around him.

He stroked the hens and they responded with delighted clucks, he gobbled with the turkeys and they at once were all attention, he quacked with the ducks, and cackled with a pair of exceedingly flattered geese.

The dawn progressed and it seemed that the doctor would never be done with his ministrations when quite abruptly something broke his revery.

It was a fine broody hen, white, with a maternal eye and a striking abundance of feathers in the under region of the abdomen.

The doctor, with the air of a man whose professional interests have found scope, drew Alex's attention to those excellences which might otherwise have escaped him: the fine color in comb and wattles, the length and quality of neck and saddle hackles, the firm, wide spread of the toes, and a rare justness in the formation of the ear lappets.

All search was ended;;

he had found his fowl.

The purchase was effected and they made their way towards the hotel again, the hen, with whom some sort of communication had been set up, nestling in the doctor's arms.

The clocks struck seven-thirty as they approached the hotel entrance;;

and hopes that the chambermaid and patronne would still be abed began to rise in Alex's well exercised breast.

The doctor was wearing a long New England greatcoat, hardly necessary in the June weather but a garment which proved well adapted to the sequestration of hens.

Alex entered first and was followed by the doctor who, for all his care, manifested a perceptible bulge on his left side where the hen was cradled.

They advanced in a line across the entrance hall to the stairway and up, with gingerly steps, towards the first landing.

It was then that they heard the tread of one descending and, in some perturbation glancing up, saw the patronne coming towards them as they gained the landing.

`` Bonjour, messieurs, vous etes matinals '', she greeted them pleasantly.

Alex explained that they had been out for a stroll before breakfast while the doctor edged around behind him, attempting to hide the protuberance at his left side behind Alex's arm and back.

`` Vous voulez vos petits dejeuners tout de suite alors ''??

Their hostess enquired.

Alex told her that there was no hurry for their breakfasts, trying at the same time to effect a speedy separation of the persons before and behind him.

The doctor, he noticed, was attempting a transverse movement towards the stairs, but before the movement could be completed a distinct and audible cluck ruffled the air in the hollow of the stair-well.

Eyes swerved in the patronne's head, Alex coughed loudly, and the doctor, with a sforzando of chicken noises floating behind him, took to the stairs in long-shanked leaps.

`` Comment ''??

Ejaculated the surprised woman, looking at Alex for an explanation but he, parting from her without ceremony, only offered a few words about the doctor's provincial American speech and a state of nerves brought on by the demands of his work.

With that he hurried up the stairs, followed by her suspicious gaze.

When Alex entered his room, the doctor was already preparing a nest in the straw case, six eggs ready for the hen's attentions.

There was no reference to the incident on the stairs, his powers being absorbed by this more immediate business.

The hen appeared to have no doubts as to her duties and was quick to settle down to the performance of them.

One part of her audience was totally engaged, the connoisseur witnessing a peculiarly fine performance of some ancient classic, the other part, the guest of the connoisseur, attentive as one who must take an intelligent interest in that which he does not fully understand.

The spectacle progressed towards a denouement which was obviously still remote;;

the audience attended.

Time elapsed but the doctor was obviously unconscious of its passage until an unwelcome knock on the door interrupted the processes of nature.

Startled, he jumped up to pull hen and case out of view, and Alex went to the door.

He opened it a crack and in doing so made as much shuffling, coughing, and scraping noise as possible in order to drown emanations from the hen who had begun to protest.

It was Giselle, the fille de chambre, come to clean the room, and while she stood before him with ears pricked up and regard all curiosity, explaining her errand, Alex could see from the corner of his eye the doctor doing all he could to calm the displeased bird.

Giselle was reluctant but Alex succeeded in persuading her to come back in five minutes and the door was shut again.

`` Who was that, young feller ''??

The doctor instantly asked.

`` That was the fille de chambre, the one you thought couldn't get the eggs out.

She looked mighty interested, though.

Anyhow she's coming back in five minutes to do the room ''.

The doctor's mind was working at a great speed;;

he rose to put his greatcoat on and addressed Alex in a muted voice.

`` Have you got our keys handy ''??

`` Right in my pocket ''.

`` All right.

Now you go outside and beckon me when it's safe ''.

The hall was empty and Alex beckoned;;

they climbed the stairs which creaked, very loudly to their sensitive ears, and reached the next floor.

A guest was locking his room;;

they passed behind him and got to Alex's room unnoticed.

The doctor sat down rather wearily, caressing the hen and remarking that the city was not the place for a poultry-loving man, but no sooner was the remark out than a knock at this door obliged him to cover the hen with his greatcoat once more.

At the door Alex managed to persuade the increasingly astonished fille de chambre to return in ten minutes.

It was evident that a second transfer had to be effected, and that it had to take place between the time the fille finished the doctor's room and the time she began Alex's.

They waited three minutes and then crept out on tip-toe;;

the halls were empty and they passed down the stairs to number nine and listened at the door.

A bustle of sheets being smoothed and pillows being arranged indicated the fille de chambre's presence inside;;

they listened and suddenly a step towards the door announced another important fact.

The doctor shot down to the lavatory and turned the doorknob, but to no effect: the lavatory was occupied.

Although a look of alarm passed over his face, he did not arrest his movements but disappeared into the shower room just as the chambermaid emerged from number nine.

Alex suppressed those expressions of relief which offered to prevail in his face and escape from his throat;;

unwarranted they were in any case for, as he stood facing the fille de chambre, his ears were assailed by new sounds from the interior of the shower room.

The events of the last quarter of an hour, mysterious to any bird accustomed only to the predictable life of coop and barnyard, had overcome the doctor's hen and she gave out a series of cackly wails, perhaps mourning her nest, but briefly enjoyed.

The doctor's wits had not left him, however, for all his sixty-eight years, and the wails were almost immediately lost in the sound of water rushing out from the showerhead.

Alex nodded to the maid as though nothing unusual were taking place and entered the doctor's room.

Shortly, the doctor himself entered, his hair somewhat wet from the shower, but evidently satisfied with the outcome of their adventures.

Without comment he opened the closet and from its shelves constructed a highboard around the egg case which he had placed on the floor inside.

Next, the hen was nested and all seemed well.

The two men sat for some time, savoring the pleasure of escape from peril and the relief such escape brings, before they got up and left the hotel, the doctor to go to the conference house and Alex to go to the main post office.

Alex returned to the hotel, rather weary and with no new prospects of a role, in the late afternoon, but found the doctor in an ebullient mood.

At the time Alex arrived he was engaged in some sort of intimate communication with the hen, who had settled herself on the nest most peacefully after the occurrences of the morning.

`` Chickens have short memories '', the doctor remarked, `` that's why they are better company than most people I know '', and he went on to break some important news to Alex.

`` Well '', he began, `` It seems like some people in Paris want to hear more from me than those fellers over at the conference house do.

They've got a big vulture from Tanganika at the zoo here, with a wife for him, too, very rare birds, both of them, the only Vulturidae of their species outside Africa.

Seems like she's willing, but the male just flops around all day like the bashful boy who took Jeannie May behind the barn and then didn't know what to do, and the people at the zoo haven't got any vulture chicks to show for their trouble.

Going downstairs with the tray, Winston wished he could have given in to Miss Ada, but he knew better than to do what she said when she had that little-girl look.

There were times it wasn't right to make a person happy, like the times she came in the kitchen and asked know we don't keep peanut `` butter for a peanut butter sandwich.

You in this house '', he always told her.

`` Why, Winston '', she'd cry, `` I just now saw you eating it out of the jar ''!!

But he knew how important it was for her to keep her figure.

In the kitchen, Leona, his little young wife, was reading the morning paper.

Her legs hung down long and thin as she sat on the high stool.

`` Here '', Winston said gently, `` what's these dishes doing not washed ''??

The enormous plates which had held Mr. Jack's four fried eggs and five strips of bacon were still stacked in the sink.

`` Leave me alone '', Leona said.

`` Can't you see I'm busy ''??

She looked at him impudently over the corner of the paper.

`` This is moving day '', Winston reminded her, `` and I bet you left things every which way upstairs, your clothes all over the floor and the bed not made.

Leona ''!!

His eye had fastened on her leg;;

bending, he touched her knee.

`` If I catch you one more time down here without stockings '' --

She twitched her leg away.

`` Fuss, fuss, old man ''.

She had an alley cat's manners.

Winston stacked Miss Ada's thin pink dishes in the sink.

Then he spread out the last list on the counter.

`` To Be Left Behind '' was printed at the top in Miss Ada;;

fine hand.

Winston took out a pencil, admired the point, and wrote slowly and heavily, `` Clothes Stand ''.

Sighing, Leona dropped the paper and stood up.

`` I guess I better get ready to go ''.

Winston watched her fumbling to untie her apron.

`` Here ''.

Carefully, he undid the bow.

`` How come your bows is always cockeyed ''??

She turned and put her arms around his neck.

`` I don't want to leave here, Winston ''.

`` Now listen to that ''.

He drew back, embarrassed and pleased.

`` I thought you was sick to death of this big house.

Said you wore yourself out, cleaning all these empty rooms ''.

`` At least there is room here '', she said.

`` What room is there going to be in an apartment for any child ''??

`` I told you what Miss Ada's doctor said ''.

`` I don't mean Miss Ada!!

What you think I care about that??

I mean our children ''.

She sounded as though they already existed.

In spite of the hundred things he had on his mind, Winston went and put his arm around her waist.

`` We've got plenty of time to think about that.

All the time in the world.

We've only been married four years, January ''.

`` Four years ''!!

She wailed.

`` That's a long time, waiting ''.

`` How many times have I told you '' -- he began, and was almost glad when she cut him off -- `` Too many times ''!!

-- and flounced to the sink, where she began noisily to wash her hands.

Too many times was the truth of it, Winston thought.

He hardly believed his reason himself any more.

Although it had seemed a good reason, to begin with: no couple could afford to have children.

`` How you going to work with a child hanging on you ''??

He asked Leona.

`` You want to keep this job, don't you ''??

He doubted whether she heard him, over the running water.

He sat for a while with his hands on his knees, watching the bend of her back as she gathered up her things -- a comb, a bottle of aspirin -- to take upstairs and pack.

She made him sad some days, and he was never sure why;;

it was something to do with her back, the thinness of it, and the quick, jerky way she bent.

She was too young, that was all;;

too young and thin and straight.

`` Winston ''!!

It was Mr. Jack, bellowing out in the hall.

Winston hurried through the swinging door.

`` I've been bursting my lungs for you '', Mr. Jack complained.

He was standing in front of the mirror, tightening his tie.

He had on his gray tweed overcoat and his city hat, and his brief case lay on the bench.

`` I don't know what you think you've been doing about my clothes '', he said.

`` This coat looks like a rag heap ''.

There were a few blades of lint on the shoulder.

Winston took the clothesbrush out of the closet and went to work.

He gave Mr. Jack a real going-over;;

he brushed his shoulders and his back and his collar with long, firm strokes.

`` Hey ''!!

Mr. Jack cried when the brush tipped his hat down over his eyes.

Winston apologized and quickly set the hat right.

Then he stood back to look at Mr. Jack, who was pulling on his pigskin gloves.

Winston enjoyed seeing him start out;;

he wore his clothes with style.

When he was going to town, nothing was good enough -- he had cursed at Winston once for leaving a fleck of polish on his shoelace.

At home, he wouldn't even wash his hands for supper, and he wandered around the yard in a pair of sweaty old corduroys.

The velvet smoking jackets, pearl-gray, wine, and blue, which Miss Ada had bought him hung brushed and unworn in the closet.

`` Good-by, Winston '', Mr. Jack said, giving a final set to his hat.

`` Look out for those movers ''!!

Winston watched him hurry down the drive to his car;;

a handsome, fine-looking man it made him proud to see.

After Mr. Jack drove away, Winston went on looking out the window.

He noticed a speck of dirt on the sill and swiped at it with his finger.

Then he looked at his finger, at the wrinkled, heavy knuckle and the thick nail he used like a knife to pry up, slit, and open.

For the first time, he be sad about the move.

That house was ten years off his life let himself.

Each brass handle and hinge shone for his reward, and he knew how to get at the dust in the china flowers and how to take down the long glass drops which hung from the chandelier.

He knew the house like a blind man, through his fingers, and he did not like to think of all the time and rags and polishes he had spent on keeping it up.

Ten years ago, he had come to the house to be interviewed.

The tulips and the big pink peonies had been blooming along the drive, and he had walked up from the bus almost singing.

Miss Ada had been out back, in a straw hat, planting flowers.

She had talked to him right there, with the hot sun in his face, which made him sweat and feel ashamed.

Winston had been surprised at her for that.

Still, he had liked the way she had looked, in a fresh, neat cotton dress -- citron yellow, if he remembered.

She had had a dignity about her, even barefoot and almost too tan.

Since then, the flowers she had planted had spread all over the hill.

Already the jonquils were blooming in a flock by the front gate, and the periwinkles were coming on, blue by the porch steps.

In a week the hyacinths would spike out.

And the dogwood in early May, for Miss Ada's alfresco party;;

and after that the Japanese cherries.

Now the yard looked wet and bald, the trees bare under their buds, but in a while Miss Ada's flowers would bloom like a marching parade.

She had dug a hole for each bulb, each tree wore a tag with her writing on it;;

where would she go for her gardening now??

Somehow Winston didn't think she'd take to window boxes.

Sighing, he hurried to the living room.

He had a thousand things to see to.

Still, he couldn't help thinking, we're all getting old, getting small;;

the snail is pulling in her horns.

In the living room, Miss Ada was standing by the window with a sheaf of lists in her hand.

She was looking out at the garden.

`` Winston '', she said, `` get the basket for the breakables ''.

Winston had the big straw basket ready in the hall.

He brought it in and put it down beside her.

Miss Ada was looking fine;;

she had on her Easter suit, blue, with lavender binding.

Halfway across the house, he could have smelled her morning perfume.

It hung in all her day clothes, sweet and strong;;

sometimes when he was pressing, Winston raised her dresses to his face.

Frowning, Miss Ada studied the list.

`` Well, let's see.

The china lemon tree.

The alabaster cockatoo ''.

Winston followed her around the room, collecting the small frail objects( Christmas, birthday, and anniversary) and wrapping them in tissue paper.

Neither of them trusted the movers.

When they came to Mr. Jack's photograph, twenty by twelve inches in a curly silver frame, Miss Ada said, `` By rights I ought to leave that, seeing he won't take my clotheshorse ''.

She smiled at Winston, and he saw the hateful hard glitter in her eyes.

He picked up the photograph and began to wrap it.

`` At least you could leave it for the movers '', Miss Ada said.

`` What possessed you to tell me a clotheshorse would be a good idea ''??

Winston folded the tissue paper carefully.

`` He's used it every day;;

every morning, I lay out his clothes on it ''.

`` Well, that's over now.

And it was his main present!!

Leave that fool picture out '', she added sharply.

Winston laid it in the basket.

`` Mr. Jack sets store by that ''.

`` Really, Winston.

It was meant to be my present ''.

But she went on down the list.

Winston was relieved;;

those presents had been on his mind.

He had only agreed with Miss Ada about getting the valet, but he had actually suggested the photograph to Mr. Jack.

`` You know what she likes, Winston '', he had said wearily, one evening in November when Winston was pulling off his overshoes.

`` Tell me what to get her for Christmas ''.

`` She's been talking about a picture '', Winston had told him.

`` Picture!!

You mean picture of me ''??

But Winston had persuaded him.

On Christmas night, they had had a disagreement about it.

Winston had heard because he was setting up the liquor tray in the next room.

Through the door, he had seen Mr. Jack walking around, waiting for Miss Ada.

Finally she had come down;;

Winston had heard her shaking out the skirt of her new pink silk hostess gown.

`` How do you like it ''??

She had asked.

Mr. Jack had said, `` You look about fifteen years old ''.

`` Is that a compliment ''??

`` I don't know ''.

He had stood at a little distance, studying her, as though he would walk around next and look at the back of her head.

`` Lovie, you make me feel naked ''.

Miss Ada had giggled, and she went sweeping and rustling to the couch and sank down.

`` You look like that picture I have at the office '', Mr. Jack had started.

`` Not a line, not a wrinkle.

I look like an old man, compared '', and he had picked up his photograph with the red Christmas bow still on it.

`` Look, an old man.

Will you wear pink when you're sixty ''??

`` Darling, I love that photograph.

I'm going to put it on my dresser ''.

`` I guess it's children make a woman old.

A man gets old anyhow ''.

After a minute he went on, `` People must think the curse is on me, seeing you fresh as an apple and me old and gray ''.

`` I'll give you a medical certificate, framed, if you like '', Miss Ada had said.

`` No.

All I want is a picture -- with a few lines.

Make the man put them in if he has to ''.

After that they had sat for five minutes without saying a word.

Then Miss Ada had stood up, rustling and rustling, and gone upstairs.

Was it love??

I had no doubt that it was.

During the rest of the summer my scholarly mania for making plaster casts and spatter prints of Catskill flowers and leaves was all but surpassed by the constantly renewed impressions of Jessica that my mind served up to me for contemplation and delight.

Nothing in all the preceding years had had the power to bring me closer to a knowledge of profound sorrow than the breakup of camp, the packing away of my camp uniforms, the severing of ties with the six or ten people I had grown most to love in the world.

In final separation from them, in the railroad terminal across the river from New York, I would nearly cry.

My parents' welcoming arms would seem woeful, inadequate, unwanted.

But that year was different, for just as the city, in the form of my street clothes, had intruded upon my mountain nights, so an essential part of the summer gave promise of continuing into the fall: Jessica and I, about to be separated not by a mere footbridge or messhall kitchen but by the immense obstacle of residing in cruelly distant boroughs, had agreed to correspond.

These letters became the center of my existence.

I lived to see an envelope of hers in the morning mail and to lock myself in my room in the afternoon to reread her letter for the tenth time and finally prepare an answer.

My memory has catalogued for easy reference and withdrawal the image of her pink, scented stationery and the unsloped, almost printed configurations of her neat, studious handwriting with which she invited me to recall our summer, so many sentences beginning with `` Remember when;;

'' and others concerning camp friends who resided in her suburban neighborhood,, and news of her commencing again her piano lessons, her private school, a visit to Boston to see her grandparents and an uncle who was a surgeon returned on furlough, wounded, from the war in Europe.

In my letters I took on a personality that differed from the self I knew in real life.

Then epistolatory me was a foreign correspondent dispatching exciting cables and communiques, full of dash and wit and glamor, quoting from the books I read, imitating the grand styles of the authors recommended by a teacher in whose special, after-school class I was enrolled.

The letters took their source from a stream of my imagination in which I was transformed into a young man not unlike my bunkmate Eliot Sands -- he of the porch steps anecdotes -- who smoked cigarettes, performed the tango, wore fifty dollar suits, and sneaked off into the dark with girls to do unimaginable things with them.

Like Eliot, in my fantasies, I had a proud bearing and, with a skill that was vaguely continental, I would lead Jessica through an evening of dancing and handsome descriptions of my newest exploits, would guide her gently to the night's climax which, in my dreams, was always represented by our almost suffocating one another to death with deep, moist kisses burning with love.

The night after reading her letter about her surgeon uncle -- it must have been late in September -- I had a vision of myself returned in ragged uniform from The Front, nearly dying, my head bandaged and blooded, and Jessica bending over me, the power of her love bringing me back to life.

For many nights afterward, the idea of her having been so close to me in that imagined bed would return and fill me with obscure and painful desires, would cause me to lie awake in shame, tossing with irresolution, longing to fall into a deep sleep.

The weeks went by, and the longer our separation grew, the more unbounded and almost unbearable my fantasies became.

They caused my love for Jessica to become warmer and at the same time more hopeless, as if my adolescent self knew that only torment would ever bring me the courage to ask to see her again.

As it turned out, Jessica took matters into her own hands.

Having received permission to give a camp reunion-Halloween party, she asked that I come and be her date.

I went and, mum and nervous, all but made a fool of myself.

Again among those jubilantly reunited bunkmates, I was shy with Jessie and acted as I had during those early Saturday mornings when we all seemed to be playing for effect, to be detached and unconcerned with the girls who were properly our dates but about whom, later, in the privacy of our bunks, we would think in terms of the most elaborate romance.

I remember standing in a corner, watching Jessica act the hostess, serving soft drinks to her guests.

She was wearing her dark hair in two, thick braids to attain an `` American Girl '' effect she thought was appropriate to Halloween.

It made her look sweet and schoolgirlish, I was excited to be with her, but I did not know how to express it.

Yet a moment did come that night when the adventurous letter writer and fantasist seemed to stride off my flashy pages, out of my mind, and plant himself in reality.

It was late, we were playing kissing games, and Jessica and I were called on to kiss in front of the others.

We blushed and were flustered, and it turned out to be the fleetest brush of lips upon cheek.

The kiss outraged our friends but it was done and meanwhile had released in me all the remote, exciting premonitions of lust, all the mysterious sensations that I had imagined a truly consummated kiss would convey to me.

It was at that party that, finally overcoming my timidity, inspired by tales only half-understood and overheard among older boys, I asked Jessie to spend New Year's Eve with me.

Lovingly, she accepted, and so great was my emotion that all I could think of saying was, `` You're amazing, you know ''??

Later, we agreed to think of how we wished to spend that night.

We would write to one another and make a definite plan.

She was terribly pleased.

Among my school and neighborhood friends, during the next months, I bragged and swaggered and pompously described my impending date.

But though I boasted and gave off a dapper front, I was beneath it all frightened.

It would be the first time I had ever been completely alone with a girl I loved.

I had no idea of what subjects one discussed when alone with a girl, or how one behaved: Should I hold her hand while walking or only when crossing the street??

Should I bring along a corsage or send one to her??

Was it preferable to meet her at home or in the city??

Should I accompany her to the door of her home, or should I ask to be invited in??

In or out, should I kiss her goodnight??

All this was unknown to me, and yet I had dared to ask her out for the most important night of the year!!

When in one letter Jessica informed me that her father did not like the idea of her going out alone on New Year's Eve, I knew for a moment an immense relief;;

but the letter went on: she had cried, she had implored, she had been miserable at his refusal, and finally he had relented -- and now how happy she was, how expectant!!

Her optimism gave me heart.

I forced confidence into myself.

I made inquiries, I read a book of etiquette.

In December I wrote her with authority that we would meet on the steps of the Hotel Astor, a rendezvous spot that I had learned was the most sophisticated.

We would attend a film and, later on, I stated, we might go to the Mayflower Coffee Shop or Child's or Toffenetti's for waffles.

I set the hour of our meeting for seven.

At five o'clock that night it was already dark, and behind my closed door I was dressing as carefully as a groom.

I wore a new double-breasted brown worsted suit with a faint herringbone design and wide lapels like a devil's ears.

My camp-made leather wallet, bulky with twisted, raised stitches around the edges, I stuffed with money I had been saving.

Hatless, in an overcoat of rough blue wool, I was given a proud farewell by my mother and father, and I set out into the strangely still streets of Brooklyn.

I felt superior to the neighborhood friends I was leaving behind, felt older than my years, and was full of compliments for myself as I headed into the subway that was carrying its packs of passengers out of that dull borough and into the unstable, tantalizing excitement of Manhattan.

Times Square, when I ascended to it with my fellow subway travellers( all dressed as if for a huge wedding in a family of which we were all distant members), was nearly impassable, the sidewalks swarming with celebrants, with bundled up sailors and soldiers already hugging their girls and their rationed bottles of whiskey.

Heavy-coated, severe-looking policemen sat astride noble horses along the curbside to prevent the revellers from spilling out in front of the crawling traffic.

The night was cold but the crowd kept one warm.

The giant electric signs and marquees were lit up for the first time since blackout regulations had been instituted, and the atmosphere was alive with the feeling that victory was just around the corner.

Cardboard noisemakers, substitutes for the unavailable tin models, were being hawked and bought at makeshift stands every few yards along Broadway, and one's ears were continually serenaded by the horns' rasps and bleats.

An old gentlemen next to me held a Boy Scout bugle to his lips and blasted away at every fourth step and during the interim shouted out, `` V for Victory ''!!

His neighbors cheered him on.

There was a great sense of camaraderie.

How did one join them??

Where were they all walking to??

Was I supposed to buy a funny hat and a rattle for Jessica??

It was a quarter of seven when the crowd washed me up among the other gallants who had established the Astor steps as the beach-head from which to launch their night of merrymaking.

I looked over their faces and felt a twinge: they all looked so much more knowing than I.

I looked away.

I looked for Jessica to materialize out of the clogging, curdling crowd and, as the time passed and I waited, a fiend came to life beside me and whispered in my ear: How was I planning to greet Jessica??

Where exactly would we go after the movie??

Suppose the lines in front of the movie houses were too long and we couldn't get in??

Suppose I hadn't brought along enough money??

I felt for my wallet.

Its thick, substantial outline calmed me.

But when I saw that it was already ten past seven, I began to wonder if something had gone wrong.

Suppose her father had changed his mind and had refused to let her leave??

Suppose at this very moment her father was calling my house in an effort to cancel the plans??

I grew uneasy.

All about me there was a hectic interplay of meetings taking place, like abrupt, jerky scenes in old silent movies, joyous greetings and beginnings, huggings and kissings, enthusiastic forays into the festive night.

Whole platoons were taking up new positions on the steps, arriving and departing, while I stayed glued, like a signpost, to one spot.

At 7:25 two hotel doormen came thumping down the steps, carrying a saw-horse to be set up as a barricade in front of the haberdashery store window next to the entranceway, and as I watched them in their gaudy red coats that nearly scraped the ground, their golden, fringed epaulets and spic, red-visored caps, I suddenly saw just over their shoulders Jessica gracefully making her way through the crowd.

My heart almost stopped beating.

